Obamacare premiums will soar in 2017 , the administration acknowledged Monday , with the price of the most popular benchmark plans jumping an average of 22 percent as the law continues to rely on older , sicker customers than its backers had envisioned .
The number of insurers offering plans on the federally run exchange will also plummet as companies tap out , saying they can ’ t figure out a way to make the economics work — and raising the risk of lower competition and worse premium increases .
Roughly one in five customers will have only a single insurer as an option next year after major players such as UnitedHealth Group and Aetna withdrew from most states and nearly all of Obamacare ’ s co-op plans failed .
That ’ s particularly rough news for President Obama , who is trying to boost his legacy in his final months in office , and for Hillary Clinton , his would-be Democratic successor , who has defended the law .
“ This shows why the entire program must be repealed and replaced , ” said Jason Miller , a spokesman for Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump .
Congressional Republicans , struggling to maintain their majorities in both chambers , also seized on the news , warning voters that electing Democrats would cement the Affordable Care Act into law .
Obamacare customers — who at this time of year are also voters — can get a first look next week at their own rates when they log onto the federal HealthCare.gov website . Open enrollment for 2017 begins Nov. 1 .
The Health and Human Services Department urged consumers to shop around to try to find the best deals and said 80 percent of customers won ’ t feel the full sticker shock because they qualify for taxpayer-funded subsidies .
HHS said nearly three-quarters of customers in 2017 will be able to find a plan for $ 75 or less per month after that tax credits kick in .
“ I know that there has been much talk and discussion about marketplace rate increases this year . But headline rate changes don ’ t actually reflect what the vast majority of consumers will pay , ” HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell has said about open enrollment .
Yet several million customers do not qualify for government subsidies or purchase insurance off the exchanges , so they will feel the full brunt of the increases .
Taxpayers will also have to shell out more money to cover the subsidies for those who do qualify — meaning Obamacare ’ s costs will continue to rise .
On Monday , the House Energy and Commerce Committee asked the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to detail just how much of a burden taxpayers are shouldering .
“ While the administration continues to focus on premium ‘ affordability , ’ it ignores the undeniable fact that federal taxpayers are subsidizing these premium increases through tax credits , ” wrote Rep. Fred Upton , Michigan Republican and the panel ’ s chairman , along with other leading members . “ The committee is concerned that the federal taxpayer continues to bear the burden of subsidizing the growing cost of health care insurance . ”
Analysts for months had warned of massive premium increases , saying the Obamacare program is still struggling to entice healthy customers who are needed to make the economics work .
Minnesota Gov . Mark Dayton , a Democrat , recently said the law “ is no longer affordable for an increasing number of people. ” Tennessee Insurance Commissioner Julie McPeak said the state ’ s Obamacare exchange is “ very near collapse . ”
“ The fact that premium increases in the ACA marketplaces are going to be substantially higher in 2017 has been known for months , so there ’ s no October surprise here , ” said Larry Levitt , a senior vice president at the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation . “ The start of open enrollment just means that these increases are becoming more tangible for those consumers who are affected . ”
Increases will vary widely from place to place , though some of the figures are eye-popping : In Arizona , a 27-year-old ’ s average monthly premium for the second-lowest silver , or “ benchmark , ” plan jumps $ 196 to $ 422 , a 116 percent increase , before subsidies .
In Oklahoma , that same customer would get a 69 percent increase . Customers in Indiana and Massachusetts , which runs its own exchange , would be the only ones to see a decrease , of 3 percent , according to the HHS report .
The administration said things could get worse if the federal courts do not overturn a judge ’ s decision in May that sided with House Republicans , who say the Treasury is unlawfully reimbursing insurers for losses under the 2010 health care overhaul .
In court papers Monday , the Justice Department said Republicans shouldn ’ t have been allowed to sue over the cost-sharing program , which is designed to pay back insurers who must help poorer enrollees with out-of-pocket expenses .
Millions of Obamacare customers with incomes from 100 percent to 250 percent of the poverty line rely on the payments , and health care plans are required to reduce their out-of-pocket costs , whether they are reimbursed or not .
“ If the government stopped making cost-sharing reduction payments , insurers would still be required by statute to reduce the cost-sharing charges they impose on eligible individuals , ” administration attorneys wrote . “ Instead of recouping those costs as required by the statute , the insurers would make up the difference by raising their premiums . ”
Despite headwinds , Mrs. Burwell is predicting that the marketplace will expand by roughly 1 million customers in 2017 as insurers bring their prices in line with actual costs .
She estimated that 13.8 million people will buy plans during open enrollment on the exchanges , compared with 12.7 million who initially signed up for 2016 .
That is still short of the 15 million that congressional scorekeepers predicted just a few months ago .
Even Mr. Obama has said his law will need changes after he is out of office , including a government-run plan , or “ public option , ” to bolster competition in the exchanges .
As it stands , the number of insurers participating on HealthCare.gov has dwindled from 232 this year to 167 in 2017 .
HHS said customers on HealthCare.gov , which serves 39 states , will still be able to choose , on average , from 30 plans with different combinations of premiums , out-of-pocket costs , networks of hospitals and physicians , and prescription drug coverage options .