At 3:30 p.m. on Friday , Mr. Ryan called Republicans into a closed-door meeting to deliver the news that the bill would be withdrawn , with no plans to try again . The meeting lasted five minutes . One of the architects of the House bill , Representative Greg Walden , Republican of Oregon and the chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee , put it bluntly : “ This bill ’ s done . ”
“ We are going to focus on other issues at this point , ” he said .
The Republican bill would have repealed tax penalties for people without health insurance , rolled back federal insurance standards , reduced subsidies for the purchase of private insurance and set new limits on spending for Medicaid , the federal-state program that covers more than 70 million low-income people . The bill would have repealed hundreds of billions of dollars in taxes imposed by the Affordable Care Act and would also have cut off federal funds to Planned Parenthood for one year .
Mr. Ryan had said the bill included “ huge conservative wins. ” But it never won over conservatives who wanted a more thorough eradication of the Affordable Care Act . Nor did it have the backing of more moderate Republicans who were anxiously aware of the Congressional Budget Office ’ s assessment that the bill would leave 24 million more Americans without insurance in 2024 , compared with the number who would be uninsured under the current law .
The budget office also warned that in the short run , the Republicans ’ legislation would drive insurance premiums higher . For older Americans approaching retirement , the cost of insurance could have risen sharply .
With the House ’ s most hard-line conservatives holding fast against the bill , support for the legislation collapsed Friday after more and more Republicans came out in opposition . They included Representatives Rodney Frelinghuysen of New Jersey , the soft-spoken chairman of the House Appropriations Committee , and Barbara Comstock of Virginia , whose suburban Washington district went for the Democratic presidential nominee , Hillary Clinton , in November .
“ Seven years after enactment of Obamacare , I wanted to support legislation that made positive changes to rescue health care in America , ” Mr. Frelinghuysen said . “ Unfortunately , the legislation before the House today is currently unacceptable as it would place significant new costs and barriers to care on my constituents in New Jersey . ”