Six voters in ten describe implementation of ObamaCare as “ a joke , ” and more voters than not say problems with the government ’ s health insurance website are so bad someone should be fired , according to a ███ national poll .
The new poll , released Wednesday , also finds a majority continues to dislike President Obama ’ s signature achievement : 51 percent of voters use negative terms to describe the health care law , saying it is either “ a step backward ” or “ disastrous. ” That ’ s down two percentage points from 53 percent in August . On the other side , 44 percent describe ObamaCare positively , either as “ wonderful ” or “ progress. ” It was 43 percent two months ago .
Most Democrats continue to describe the health care law positively : 12 percent “ wonderful ” and 62 percent “ progress , ” while most Republicans continue to call it “ a step backward ” ( 20 percent ) or “ disastrous ” ( 66 percent ) .
Meanwhile , 60 percent of voters say the way the law is being carried out is “ a joke. ” That ’ s up just a touch from the 57 percent who felt that way in August . Likewise , 31 percent say things are “ going fine ” -- unchanged from this summer .
Is it so bad someone should be fired ? By a margin of 49-38 percent , voters agree with President Obama ’ s former press secretary Robert Gibbs as well as others who say the problems on the government ’ s website are a firing offense . Another seven percent say it ’ s too soon to say .
A third of Democrats feel the way ObamaCare is being carried out is “ a joke ” ( 33 percent ) and the same number says those accountable for the website should be fired ( 33 percent ) .
“ It ’ s striking that even after the severely botched roll-out of the insurance exchange website that opinions of the health care law have barely budged , ” says Democratic pollster Chris Anderson , who conducts the ███ poll with Republican pollster Daron Shaw . “ The government shutdown clearly backfired for Republicans . It drove down their own ratings while distracting attention from the website problems . ”
According to Shaw , the lack of a shift in numbers despite the bad roll-out suggests one of two things is going on . “ It may be that people have simply made up their minds about ObamaCare , so that TV ads and speeches and roll-out glitches do n't matter . Or it may be that it 's just too soon to assess the impact of the roll-out and the negative media coverage that 's followed . ''
A 55-percent majority of those who accessed the government ’ s health insurance website say it didn ’ t go well . That includes 37 percent who say “ not at all well. ” Others had a better experience : 19 percent say it worked “ very well ” and another “ 25 percent ” say it worked “ somewhat well . ”
Overall , more voters would like to “ get rid of ” ObamaCare ( 51 percent ) than keep the law in place ( 41 percent ) . In July , 53 percent said repeal it , while 40 percent said keep it .
Voters are almost six times as likely to think the government shutdown and Republican attempts to delay or defund ObamaCare did more to hurt ( 39 percent ) than help ( 7 percent ) the GOP ’ s chances of killing the law . Just over half think the GOP ’ s actions didn ’ t make a difference either way ( 51 percent ) .
Among Republicans , 10 percent say the shutdown helped their cause , 28 percent say it hurt and 58 percent say it didn ’ t make much difference .
Almost all voters -- 92 percent -- think members of Congress and their staffs should be required to live under the laws passed for the American people . Six percent think there are times lawmakers should be given special rules or “ exemptions . ”
The ███ poll is based on landline and cell phone interviews with 1,020 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research ( D ) and Shaw & Company Research ( R ) from October 20-22 , 2013 . The full poll has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points .