The insurance `` exchanges '' set up under the Affordable Care Act , where people can shop online for health insurance , went live on Oct. 1 , and an estimated 48 million uninsured Americans can use them to try to find an affordable plan . The 2010 Obamacare law requires that people have health insurance , or that they pay a fee starting next year if they choose to opt out .
Here are the ins and outs of forgoing health insurance .
If you do n't have health insurance , and are n't sure if you want to purchase a plan , how long do you have to decide ?
You can sign up for health coverage on an exchange anytime between now and March 1 , 2014 . Your coverage would begin Jan. 1 , 2014 , at the earliest . If you do not enroll in that window , you will not be able to get health coverage through the insurance exchange marketplace until the next annual enrollment period unless there are extenuating circumstances .
How much are the penalties for not buying a health plan ?
The penalties are not very high to begin with . In 2014 , the fine to remain uninsured is $ 95 per person ( up to a family maximum of $ 285 , or 1 percent of family income , whichever is greater ) .
But the penalty will increase more than sevenfold in the next two years , with the fine running as much as $ 695 per person by 2016 . The family maximum would be as high as $ 2,085 ( or 2.5 percent of family income , whichever is greater ) .
What kind of insurance policy prevents someone from having to pay the penalty ?
In short , any plan that qualifies as `` minimum essential coverage . '' This includes plans offered on the marketplace exchange , a plan provided by your employer , Medicare , Medicaid , the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program ( CHIP ) , TRICARE , Veterans Healthcare programs , Peace Corps Volunteer plans , and possibly others . For a full list with more details , refer to Healthcare.gov .
You 'd have to pay the fee if you have only vision or dental coverage or only workers ' compensation , coverage only for specific health conditions , or a plan that offers only discounts on medical services .
Would it be cheaper to buy an insurance plan , and elect to not use it , rather than pay the fee ?
It depends , but as of now it is probably cheaper to pay the fine , provided you do not use any health-care services . You can calculate how much your health insurance premium would cost by using the Kaiser Family Foundation Subsidy Calculator , and then you can compare the cost to the penalty you would be assessed for having no insurance . The subsidy calculator takes into account your region , household income , employer coverage , number of family members , and tobacco use .
The penalty is meant to offset the costs of urgent medical care for individuals who do not have health insurance , according to Healthcare.gov . The website also warns that people without health coverage will have to pay the entire costs of all their medical care .
How does someone apply for an exemption from health insurance so that they do n't have to pay the penalty ?
You can claim exemptions on your 2014 federal tax return , or you can apply for exemptions on the Health Insurance Marketplace exchanges . ( The application is not currently available ) . Healthcare.gov will provide up-to-date information about how to apply for an exemption .
You can be exempted from the requirement to buy health insurance – and hence , from the penalty – if you meet one of the following requirements :
•You are uninsured for less than three months of the year .
•The lowest-priced converge would cost more than 8 percent of your household income .
•You ’ re a member of a recognized religious sect with religious objections to insurance , including Social Security and Medicare .
Healthcare.gov also provides a list of hardship exemptions that qualify an individual for exemption .
This flow chart from the Kaiser Family Foundation might help you determine if you need to buy health insurance .
Massachusetts has granted a religious exemption to its requirement to buy health insurance . Is this exemption still valid ?
No . The new federal requirement overrides state provisions , which means that any exemptions not listed under the Affordable Care Act are not included .
If you are not exempt , how will the penalty be assessed ?
You will be required to provide information regarding health insurance when you file your 2014 federal income taxes . For those who elect not to buy health coverage , the penalty will probably be assessed on the form or withdrawn from your tax refund .
• What to know if you already have health insurance
• Seven ways you can sign up , despite Web woes
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
• Enroll by March 31 to avoid penalty , White House clarifies