The Senate Republican health-care bill would not repeal and replace Obamacare . The federal government would remain the chief regulator of health insurance . No state would be allowed to experiment with different models for protecting people with pre-existing conditions . Federal policy would continue to push people away from inexpensive catastrophic coverage .
The bill also seems unlikely to stabilize insurance markets , even though their current instability is one of the main Republican talking points for passing it . The legislation gets rid of the “ individual mandate ” — Obamacare ’ s fines for not buying insurance — but keeps the regulations that made the mandate necessary . The result is likely to be that healthy people leave the market and sick people face much higher premiums .
From a conservative perspective , the chief selling point of the bill is Medicaid reform . The legislation caps per-person payments to the states , giving the states a new incentive to run the program efficiently . But the reform is delayed until after the 2024 presidential election . Democrats will likely be in a position to vaporize it well before then .
The legislation cuts taxes , cuts spending , and allows states to engage in some modest deregulation of health-care markets . It appears to reduce the extent of federal subsidies for insurance plans that cover abortion . And the main liberal criticism of the bill — that it would leave too many people uninsured — is misguided : We suspect that the Congressional Budget Office will find that most of the reduction in insurance rolls results from people ’ s choosing not to buy insurance when they ’ re not being threatened with fines .
The bill could be improved in any number of ways . The phase-in of Medicaid reform could be accelerated . The bill could be amended to allow for a modified version of the deregulatory waivers included in the House . The bill ’ s subsidies for people outside of Medicare , Medicaid , and the employer-based insurance system could simply be given to the states to distribute to that population without having to comply with Obamacare ’ s regulations .
If the bill is not amended in such fashion , it is likely to die , and it will be difficult to mourn the loss .
The Senate ’ s ‘ Better Care Reconciliation Act of 2017′ Finally Revealed