Sometimes touting your principles is a politically expedient way to avoid accountability .
The greatest trick any politician can pull off is to get his self-interest and his principles in perfect alignment . As Thomas More observed in Robert Bolt ’ s A Man for All Seasons , “ if we lived in a State where virtue was profitable , common sense would make us good , and greed would make us saintly . ”
Which brings me to Senator Rand Paul , the GOP ’ s would-be Man for All Seasons . Paul emerged from the smoldering debris of the Republican health-care-reform train wreck as a figure of high libertarian principle , the shining “ no ” vote on any compromise that came short of full repeal .
“ Look , this is what we ran on for four elections , ” Paul told Neil Cavuto of Fox News . “ Republicans ran four times and won every time on repeal Obamacare , and now they ’ re going to vote to keep it . Disappointing . ”
I found many of Paul ’ s arguments and complaints entirely persuasive on the merits . But there have been times when I had to wonder if the merits were all that was driving him .
Was it just a coincidence that the bill was terribly unpopular in his home state of Kentucky , where more than one in five Kentuckians are on Medicaid ?
This is the problem . When touting your principles is a politically expedient way of avoiding accountability , it ’ s hard to tell whether principles or expedience is in the driver ’ s seat . But not impossible .
Paul learned politics on the knee of his father , Ron Paul , a longtime Texas congressman and irrepressible presidential candidate . In the House , the elder Paul earned the nickname “ Dr . No ” because he voted against nearly everything on the grounds that it wasn ’ t constitutional or libertarian enough .
“ I ’ m absolutely for free trade , more so than any other member of the House , ” he told ███ ’ s John Miller in 2007 . “ But I ’ m against managed trade . ”
So Paul opposed the Central American Free Trade Agreement and all other trade deals , not on Trumpian protectionist grounds but in service to his higher libertarian conscience , which , in a brilliant pas de deux , landed him in the protectionist position anyway .
Every time health-care proceedings moved one step in Paul ’ s direction , he seemed to move one step back .
Ron Paul loved earmarks . He ’ d cram pork for his district into must-pass spending bills like an overstuffed burrito — and then vote against them in the name of purity , often boasting that he never approved an earmark or a spending bill .
In 2006 , Republicans proposed legislation to slow the growth of entitlements by $ 40 billion over five years . Democrats , as usual , screamed bloody murder about Republican heartlessness and voted against it . And so did Ron Paul — on the grounds the reform didn ’ t go far enough . Man , that sounds familiar .
Now I can ’ t say for sure that Rand Paul is carrying on the family tradition . He is different from his dad in many ways .
And yet : Every time health-care proceedings moved one step in Paul ’ s direction , he seemed to move one step back . Senator Ted Cruz offered an amendment that would open up the market for more flexible and affordable plans , like Paul wanted . No good , Paul told Fox ’ s Chris Wallace . Those plans would still be in the “ context ” of the Obamacare mandates .
“ My idea always was to replace it with freedom , legalize choice , legalize inexpensive insurance , allow people to join associations to buy their insurance , ” Paul said .
Sounds good . Except a provision for exempting associations from Obamacare mandates was already in the bill .
Paul insists he ’ s sympathetic to the GOP ’ s plight and its need to avoid a midterm catastrophe . ( It would look awful if the party did nothing on health care at all . ) His solution ? Just repeal Obamacare now , and work on a replacement later . “ I still think the entire 52 of us could get together on a more narrow , clean repeal , ” he told Wallace .
And yet : That ’ s what GOP leaders wanted to do back in January . And one senator more than any other fought to stop them , and even successfully lobbied the White House to change course and do repeal-and-replace simultaneously . Guess who ?
“ If Congress fails to vote on a replacement at the same time as repeal , ” Paul wrote back then , “ the repealers risk assuming the blame for the continued unraveling of Obamacare . For mark my words , Obamacare will continue to unravel and wreak havoc for years to come . ”
In the wake of the Senate bill ’ s collapse this week , Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell says he ’ s all for a clean repeal , and so does Rand Paul . For now .