For most of 2017 , the idea of bipartisan health care reform coming to Washington seemed fanciful if not outright crazy .
Building on work done by the House Problem Solvers Caucus over the summer , Senate Health , Education , Labor and Pensions Committee Chairman Lamar Alexander Andrew ( Lamar ) Lamar AlexanderGOP battens down the hatches after release of Trump whistleblower complaint Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran Senate again votes to end Trump emergency declaration on border wall MORE ( R-Tenn. ) and ranking member Patty Murray Patricia ( Patty ) Lynn MurrayNinth woman accuses Al Franken of inappropriate contact Schumer throws support behind Pelosi impeachment inquiry Senate Democrats hesitant to go all-in on impeachment probe MORE ( D-Wash. ) have released a bipartisan plan to stabilize the health care marketplace and keep health insurance premiums down for the American people . Their fix is not yet law—the plan will need to clear several additional hurdles . But its very existence deserves notice because it suggests bipartisanship may be making a comeback on Capitol Hill . And we need to understand why .
When the Founders were shaping our constitutional democracy , they intended for the House of Representatives to reflect more immediate popular opinion . Senators , blessed ( or sometimes cursed ) with longer terms in office , were to shave the rough edges off hastily considered House legislation . More recently , however , as my friend Sen. John McCain John Sidney McCainCindy McCain : I can see Arizona 'going Democrat ' in 2020 Ukraine scandal shows that foreign influence is a bipartisan affair America 's newest comedy troupe : House GOP MORE ( R-Ariz. ) said in his dramatic return to the Senate this summer , the Senate has rarely lived up to its reputation as the world ’ s greatest deliberative body . Senators have become prone to behave as the Founders expected House members to act , abandoning their role , as George Washington once envisioned , as a saucer to cool the House ’ s hot tea .
Earlier this year , the House Problem Solvers Caucus stepped into that political void . With the Senate caught in the throes of hyperpartisanship , a group of 40+ members , evenly divided between House Republicans and House Democrats , began working together to craft bipartisan solutions to issues that had otherwise stalled . They figured if they could work out some agreements on the House side , they would be able to inspire the same sort of approach in the Senate .
The Problem Solvers clearly figured out two key insights that are giving them growing clout on Capitol Hill . First , these Democrats and Republicans recognized that policy solutions did exist for many our country ’ s big challenges , from health care to immigration , and from tax reform to infrastructure . America wasn ’ t out of options—Washington just seemed incapable of seizing them .
Second , the Problem Solvers deduced that the nation ’ s political problems were driven largely by the fact that the far left and the far right were better organized than those who wanted to fix the nation ’ s problems . Together , they resolved that if they wanted to exert real influence , they would need a new approach . So , taking a page from the far-right Freedom Caucus , they formed a bloc and instituted bylaws requiring the whole group , Democrats and Republicans , to support any bill that had sufficient support from members of both parties within the Caucus . And they got to work .
Initially , no one expected the Caucus to touch health care . But when Sen. McCain returned from his cancer diagnosis to vote against the Republican-only repeal plan this summer , the Problem Solvers saw a window . A small group began meeting late at night to hash through a bipartisan fix . Both sides recognized that neither would like everything in the bill—but that a collaborative effort would be better for both sides than the status quo—and that their joint effort would be better for the country .
Lo and behold , they emerged with a plan to stabilize the health care marketplace . The plan had five points , but it was centered around an essential deal : The federal government would continue providing cost-sharing reduction payments ( CSRs ) to help subsidize the cost of insurance premiums and co-pays for those who can not afford it , and states would be given greater flexibility to manage their individual exchanges . To great fanfare—this was the only bipartisan approach offered in the current Congress—they released the plan to the public . The question was whether the Senate would take it up .
Initially , things looked grim . The Senate seemed focused on a GOP-only plan called Graham-Cassidy . But the steady drumbeat of the support for the Problem Solvers health care fix eventually turned the tide . Gov . John Kasich ( R-Ohio ) and Gov . John Hickenlooper ( D-Colo. ) came to Washington to support the bipartisan effort . No Labels launched a grassroots effort to show citizen support . And in the wake of President Trump ’ s plan to cut off the federal cost sharing payments , Alexander and Murray emerged with a compromise bill that reflected the Problem Solvers Caucus ’ s basic bargain .
This compromise is not law yet . But whatever happens with this particular piece of legislation , it points to a new way for Washington to do business . If solutions to our big challenges exist , we need not be held hostage to the demands of the far right and left . Bipartisanship is not dead yet . The Problem Solvers are pointing our way out of the darkness . We just need to follow the light .
Joe Lieberman is a former U.S. senator from Connecticut and a national co-chair of No Labels .