The future of Obamacare again falls on the shoulders of John Roberts and Anthony Kennedy .
As the Obama administration and Obamacare opponents prepare for another Supreme Court showdown Wednesday , both sides are tailoring their arguments to win over the chief justice , who cast the saving vote for the Affordable Care Act in 2012 , and Kennedy , the perennial swing vote on the Supreme Court .
The court is likely to split largely along ideological lines with Kennedy or Roberts casting crucial votes . Some Obamacare backers are even making a pitch to Justice Antonin Scalia to look at a broad reading of the law , although winning him over seems like a long shot .
The challengers — four Virginia residents who don ’ t want to abide by the mandate that Americans buy health insurance — argue that the Obama administration is illegally giving out Obamacare subsidies . They say a phrase in the text of the massive law — that subsidies go to “ exchanges established by the state ” — only allows the money to go to residents of the 16 states , plus Washington , D.C. , that set up their own insurance exchanges . If the plaintiffs prevail , more than 7 million people now receiving the subsidies in 34 states would lose them .
The opponents ’ lawyer , Michael A. Carvin of the law firm Jones Day , will argue that Congress all along intended to direct the subsidies through the state-run exchange as an incentive for the states to take on that task instead of leaving it to the federal government . The plaintiffs point to early versions of health reform legislation , one considered in the Senate Health , Education , Labor and Pensions Committee , that tied together subsidies and a state ’ s insurance reforms .
The first goal of Solicitor General Don Verrilli is to take apart the challengers ’ narrative . Several Democratic members of Congress who wrote the law told the court that there was never a plan to use the subsidies as an incentive to states . Of all the congressional debate over Obamacare in 2009 and 2010 , no one considered that Democrats were setting up a scheme in which blue states would get a benefit that most red states wouldn ’ t accept , the government will say .
“ If there was any ambiguity that not everyone [ would be eligible for subsidies ] there would have been a war among the Democratic Caucus that you all could not have helped but noticed , ” said John McDonough , who was a senior health staffer on the HELP Committee at the time .
The Obama administration hopes to set up a scenario in which the justices agree it ’ s clear that Congress intended for subsidies to go to everyone . That would make it much harder for them to rule that the subsidies must end merely based on the one clause . It ’ s an argument that could resonate with Roberts and Kennedy .
However , the law ’ s critics are hoping that the two justices do precisely the opposite : that they find the phrase about the state exchanges so clear-cut that they don ’ t embark on a quest to sort out what Congress intended .
Both the chief justice and Justice Kennedy have shown textualist sympathies , have shown that they care about the parsing of statutes .
“ Both the chief justice and Justice Kennedy have shown textualist sympathies , have shown that they care about the parsing of statutes , ” said Case Western University law professor Jonathan Adler , who was one of the first to argue that the subsidies were not authorized .
Even if the text of the law is not perfectly crystal clear , the Obama administration plans to argue , the federal agencies should receive deference to sort out details and ambiguities . That ’ s a concept that Neal Katyal , a former acting solicitor general who defended the 2012 health care challenge for the Obama administration , says is favored by the court ’ s conservative justices . In this case , the IRS is the agency that has been responsible for the subsidies , which come in the form of tax credits .
“ I think it will be particularly hard for the conservatives on the court to adopt the challengers ’ position on this issue , ” said Katyal , who is representing hospitals in this case .
However , opponents of the law say it would be a mistake to let an agency decide to offer tax credits , which affect tax refunds and equate to direct payments out of the U.S. Treasury .
“ Decisions of a certain magnitude are not the sort of thing that Congress would delegate to an agency , ” Adler said . “ It would really be quite something to conclude that Congress had delegated the decision whether to offer tax credits to the IRS . ”
One argument the White House and its allies are directing at Roberts : Ruling for the challengers would cause chaos in the insurance system — an idea some lawyers believe will worry the chief justice .
Several economic groups , health industries and think tanks that support the Affordable Care Act have released reports outlining the damage that would be done if the court rules against the White House . The Urban Institute says stopping the subsidies would increase the number of uninsured by 8.2 million and eliminate $ 28.8 billion in tax credits in 2016 . They further outline ripple effects that would create chaos in insurance markets .
Republican supporters of King are trying to address the chaos theory , too — and signal to the justices that they ’ ll prevent it . Three prominent Republican senators , including Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch , wrote in a Washington Post op-ed this weekend that they are working on plans to allow the subsidies to continue on a transitional basis while the GOP-led Congress works out an Obamacare alternative . They haven ’ t spelled out details , and it ’ s not clear how much support they have even among fellow Republicans .
Some legal experts sympathetic to the challengers are similarly trying to downplay the significance of the case or its political fallout .
“ The prior Obamacare case was momentous , ” said Georgetown University law professor Nicholas Rosenkranz . “ A Justice Kennedy or a Justice Roberts will bend over backwards to avoid concluding that Congress violated the Constitution . … This case is just about what the words of the statute mean . … There ’ s nothing at all daunting about this . ”
The Obama administration , in its formal brief , focuses on three specific rulings in which Roberts appears to have played a role . The most obvious , cited at least three times , was the chief justice ’ s decisive vote to uphold the health law in the 2012 case challenging the constitutionality of the individual mandate .
Government lawyers also rely on a 6-3 decision Roberts wrote last year , rejecting use of a federal chemical weapons law to prosecute a Pennsylvania woman who used toxic chemicals to attempt to poison her husband ’ s mistress .
In that case , the chief justice effectively added some more language to the statute to avoid what appeared to be an unintended result — the same kind of reading Obamacare defenders want the justices to adopt in the King case .
“ The notion that some things ‘ go without saying ’ applies to legislation just as it does to everyday life , ” Roberts wrote in the mistress-poisoning case .
Obamacare supporters say the chief justice doesn ’ t have to resort to the same degree of statutory surgery to side with the White House in this case .
Backers of the health care law have other things to worry about , though . They are nervous that Roberts might fall into a pattern of punting tough decisions to Congress even when it ’ s virtually certain that perpetually gridlocked lawmakers won ’ t act .
In a landmark ruling on the Voting Rights Act two years ago , Roberts struck down a key formula that subjected parts or all of 15 states to advance clearance of voting-related changes by the Justice Department or a federal court . The chief justice argued that if Congress didn ’ t like the decision , it could devise a new formula more suited to the times .
“ He seemed to suggest it would be no big deal for Congress to come up with a new coverage formula to determine which states needed extra voting supervision , ” said University of California at Irvine law professor Rick Hasen . “ He knew full well that Congress was not going to do that . ”
Roberts acted similarly in a decision last year striking down aggregate campaign contribution limits , repeatedly suggesting that Congress could fix any problems the court ’ s decision might create .
Hasen said it ’ s implausible that Roberts is unaware that Congress is struggling simply to fund government agencies , let alone hammer out politically polarizing legislation .
“ Either the chief justice is quite naive about how politics in Washington works , or he ’ s very smart and he likes to act like he ’ s naive , ” Hasen said , adding , “ I tend to believe he ’ s really smart . ”
The government is also trying to appeal to Kennedy — and to a lesser extent Roberts — via their interest in protecting the states from being pushed around by the federal government .
If Congress had aimed to put some muscle on states considering refusing to set up exchanges , then lawmakers were rather duplicitous , the Obama administration argues . It urges the justices to reject a reading of the law where such a consequential “ threat ” was obscurely tucked away in a giant piece of legislation .
Twenty-two states , most led by Democrats , wrote a friend-of-the-court brief , saying that they never interpreted the law to say that setting up an exchange was a precondition for subsidies .
“ The justices focused on federalism , Anthony Kennedy for example , will find very persuasive the argument from the states that … the states never got that message , ” said Elizabeth Wydra , chief counsel of the Constitutional Accountability Center .
Obama administration lawyers hang part of this argument on a case that might particularly appeal to Roberts . In their brief , they point to a 1981 ruling , which said that Congress had to provide “ clear notice ” to states on obligations for accepting federal funds . The opinion was written by then-Justice William Rehnquist , and Roberts was one of his clerks at the time .
Advocates for the law acknowledge that Kennedy came down hard against Obamacare in the 2012 case about the individual mandate . But the King case asks different questions .
“ We know how he felt [ in 2012 . ] The question is whether Justice Kennedy will be able to look at this case as separate from that case ? He really should , ” said Yale law professor Abbe Gluck , who has written extensively about the legal case for the subsidies .
And Roberts and Kennedy might not be the only justices in play for the government .
Justice Antonin Scalia , a famous proponent of the textualist movement , is known for his disdain for considering the history of legislative machinations on Capitol Hill . Yet he often rejects as caricature the notion that it means reading every word in a statute for its literal meaning .
The government ’ s brief points to Scalia ’ s words in a decision on greenhouse gas emissions last year , where he cautioned against interpreting a law in a way that would be “ inconsistent with [ or ] in fact , would overthrow — the Act ’ s structure and design . ”
Katyal says that many members of the court may feel the court needs to look at the big picture and not just four words .
“ All the members of the court have come to adopt this ‘ whole text ’ interpretation of statutes and it ’ s really hard once you adapt that philosophy to really see a way that the challengers ” win , he said . “ The conservatives on the court , particularly [ former ] Chief Justice Rehnquist have really cautioned the court against reading legislation in this way . ”