Employers are bracing for a little-noticed fee in the federal health-care law that will charge them $ 63 for each person they insure next year , one of the clearest cost increases companies face when the law takes full effect .
Companies and other plan providers will together pay $ 25 billion over three years to create a fund for insurance companies to offset the cost of covering people with high medical bills .
The fees will hit most large U.S. employers , and several have been lobbying to change the program , contending the levy is unfair because it subsidizes individually purchased plans that wo n't cover their workers . Boeing Co. BA -0.94 % and a union health plan covering retirees of General Motors , GM -3.12 % Ford Motor Co. F -2.57 % and Chrysler , among other groups , have asked federal regulators to exclude or shield their insurance recipients from the fee .
Insurance companies , which helped put the fee in the law , say the fee is essential to prevent rates from skyrocketing when insurers get an influx of unhealthy customers next year . The fee is part of a new insurance landscape created by the health law that will forbid insurers from denying coverage to people with pre-existing conditions .
The $ 63 fee will apply to plans covering millions of Americans in 2014 . It applies to employers that assume the risk for workers ' medical bills , and many private plans sold by insurers . The fee will be smaller for 2015 and 2016 , though regulators have n't set those amounts .
Few noticed the fee when the 2010 Affordable Care Act passed . Employers have spent recent months trying to peel it back , but final regulations published Monday in the Federal Register left it largely intact .
`` It 's caught most employers , if not all employers , by surprise , '' said Steve Wojcik , vice president of public policy at the National Business Group on Health in Washington , which represents large employers . `` They 're very upset about it . ''
The fee comes on top of other costs employers expect to face . Proponents of the law say it eventually will lower employers ' health costs by expanding insurance coverage to 30 million Americans , meaning employers wo n't subsidize their unpaid medical bills .
Administrators for employee health plans have warned federal regulators they could pare insurance benefits to absorb the fee . Some benefits experts expect employers will at least partially pass on the $ 63 to workers .
Boeing estimates the fee will apply to about 405,000 workers and dependents it insures , costing the Chicago-based plane maker an estimated $ 25 million in 2014 . The company spends $ 2.5 billion annually on health and insurance-related benefits .
Doug Kight , a Boeing vice president of strategy , compensation and benefits , told Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius in a December letter the aircraft maker was `` concerned about the significant cost impact '' of the fee . Among other things , he effectively asked her to reduce the levy to account for the fact that Boeing 's workers are n't part of the insurance system that can tap the reimbursement fund .
The UAW Retiree Medical Benefits Trust , which covers 806,000 retirees of General Motors , Ford , Chrysler and their dependents , asked HHS to exempt all its beneficiaries from the levy . It argued the trust , which is independent from the auto makers , should n't face the fee because its plans operate under terms set in federal district and bankruptcy courts in 2009 .
The top lobbying groups for large employers , including the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the Business Roundtable , also voiced concerns about the fee and asked regulators to delay its collection .
In the regulations published Monday , HHS declined to whittle down the levy for firms such as Boeing , citing the law 's requirements . It said the fee would n't apply to the plans of retirees whose primary coverage is Medicare , which would exclude many retired autoworkers , but it declined to categorically exempt workers in court-structured benefits plans .
A Boeing spokesman said the final regulations do n't appear to address the major issues it raised with regulators . A spokeswoman for the UAW trust declined to comment .
Federal regulators say they have heeded employers ' complaints about the fee and tweaked details of the program . They opted to collect the levy nationally instead of through each state , moved the collection date to the end of next year and calculated the fee on a per capita basis instead of as a percentage of premiums .
`` We 've tried to really work with the employers and issuers in trying to make the application of this program as least burdensome as possible , '' said Michael Hash , director of the HHS Office of Health Reform .
In 2014 , insurers will be able to tap part of the $ 25 billion to offset medical costs from high-risk individual-market consumers that total between $ 60,000 and $ 250,000 a year . Employers and other insurance issuers will pay $ 63 in 2014 for every worker , spouse , child and certain retirees they cover .
Of the fees collected , $ 20 billion will go toward paying high medical claims . HHS says the remaining $ 5 billion will be used to retroactively offset an earlier program that reimbursed employers insuring early retirees through 2011 . Under that program , Boeing received $ 50 million and the UAW trust received $ 387 million , according to a federal summary of the payouts .
A Boeing spokesman said the retiree program `` was not advertised as a program prefunded by the government to be paid back at a later time , '' and that the law 's net financial impact on Boeing is negative . The UAW trust declined to comment .
HHS says the high-risk program will lower premiums for people who buy plans through the individual insurance market by between 10 % and 15 % . For insurance plans overall , the fee is expected to raise premiums next year by about 1 % , and less in the subsequent two years of the program .
Insurance companies defend the fees , saying they will indirectly benefit employers . Companies subsidize the cost of caring for the uninsured by paying higher medical and insurance prices for workers . Moving high-risk consumers into insurance policies will minimize that problem , they say .
These uninsured `` had been the individuals going to the emergency room , '' said Karen Ignagni , president of America 's Health Insurance Plans , an insurer trade group in Washington . `` The employers definitely were picking that up . ''
Other health plans that tried and failed to win a federal exemption from the fee include so-called multiemployer insurance plans , which are jointly run by unions and employers . About 20 million Americans are covered by such plans . Federal regulators told these plans they lacked the authority to exclude them from the levy .
Those who sought an exemption include several benefit funds covering New York home-care workers , dietary aides and nursing assistants who belong to the Service Employees International Union . The funds , which insure 331,000 people , predict the fee will cost them $ 21 million next year .
Eliminating life insurance and vision benefits would offset only half the fee , the funds said in a December letter to federal regulators . Trustees would have to eliminate the entire durable-medical-equipment benefit to come close to offsetting the additional cost .
`` The funds would be bearing additional costs without gaining any additional protections , '' said Mitra Behroozi , executive director of 1199 SEIU Benefit and Pension Funds , in her letter to regulators . Through a spokeswoman , Ms. Behroozi said the fund wo n't follow through on cutting benefits , and that regulators addressed some of their concerns .
The benefit fund for 1199 SEIU received $ 4 million from the health law 's early retiree program . Ms. Behroozi said through the spokeswoman that `` the funds will still pay millions of our members ' dedicated health-care dollars in fees to the individual health-insurance market that would otherwise be used for their own coverage . ''