███ writer David Catron recently warned conservatives and libertarians about having unrealistic expectations about repealing Obamacare .
He listed the many good things that are in House Speaker Paul Ryan ’ s proposed “ American Health Care Act ” ( AHCA ) such as the repeal of both the individual and employer mandates and the elimination of Obamacare taxes . He then went on to criticize conservatives and libertarians , writing that they …
… are kvetching because of provisions like the 30 % premium surcharge that the bill would allow insurers to charge patients who wait until they are ill to buy coverage . Countless commentators have conflated this with the individual mandate , but such comparisons are ridiculous . The individual mandate requires you to buy health insurance simply because you are alive , an outrageous assault on personal liberty . The GOP plan ’ s much-discussed premium surcharge is an incentive based on an individual ’ s choices . The former eliminates personal choice altogether . The latter incentivizes intelligent choices .
Catron concludes that critics are making “ the perfect the enemy of the good . ”
As much as I admire Catron , I think he ’ s wrong here .
Consider an analogy where the health care system is a patient and congressional Republicans are a physician . The patient has headaches , back pain and abdominal pains all of which are side effects of having cancer . The physician tells the patient that he will only treat the pain . When the patient complains , the physician replies , “ You are making the perfect the enemy of the good. ” The patient replies , ” “ No , you are treating the symptoms , not the disease . ”
In the case of AHCA , the problem isn ’ t that it forces insurers to take people with pre-existing conditions as long as they pay a surcharge . It ’ s that , like Obamacare , it forces insurers to take people with pre-existing conditions , period . Obamacare took what had been known as the “ individual health insurance market ” and forced it onto the heavily regulated Potemkin markets called “ exchanges. ” The exchanges are now collapsing , and when that collapse runs its course , at best , a few insurers may remain on the exchanges . The AHCA , however , threatens to eliminate the individual insurance market entirely .
A stable “ insurance pool ” must have a sufficient number of young and healthy people to “ cross-subsidize ” the older and sicker . Under Obamacare , the young and healthy have an incentive to forego insurance on the exchanges because : ( 1 ) the regulations on the exchanges cause the price of insurance to be higher for young and healthy people — higher , that is , than what they would pay in a freer market ; and ( 2 ) insurers must sell anyone a policy during the exchanges ’ annual open enrollment period , even if the purchaser has a pre-existing condition . When not enough young people , generally ages 18 to 34 , sign up for insurance , the “ insurance pool ” is heavily comprised of people who are older and sicker . This causes insurance prices to rise so that insurers can cover their costs . As premiums go up , even more young and healthy people drop out , prices increase again , and the process repeats itself . Eventually , many insurers lose money , causing them to leave the market . This results in less competition , which also causes premiums to rise . The term for this process is a “ death spiral. ” ( For a good history on this , see the late Conrad Meier ’ s “ Destroying Insurance Markets . ” )
Obamacare tried to combat this with an individual mandate and premium subsidies . The individual mandate required everyone , including the young and healthy , to purchase insurance or pay a fine . Subsidies applied to premiums helped people pay for insurance on the exchanges and were based on income status . The lower a person ’ s income , the bigger the subsidy he would get . Since younger people tend to have lower incomes , presumably this would encourage enough of them to sign up on the exchanges .
For the insurance pools on the exchanges to be stable , the Obama administration estimated that 38 percent of the sign-ups needed to be in the 18 to 34 age range . However , people in that age range never amounted to more than 28 percent of the people who participated in the exchanges . Recently Mark Bertolini , CEO of insurance giant Aetna , said the exchanges are in a “ death spiral ” and for good reason . Going into 2017 , the average premium for policies on the exchanges increased a hefty 25 percent . Many of the major insurers — UnitedHealth , Aetna , BlueCross BlueShield , Humana — have either left most of the exchanges or are planning to next year . From 2016 to 2017 , the number of people eligible for the exchanges who had access to only one insurer jumped from 2 percent to 17 percent .
AHCA takes the death spiral and kicks it into high gear .
First , in the year 2020 , it replaces the premium subsidies with refundable tax credits based on age , with $ 2,000 for those up to age 29 and $ 2,500 for those ages 30 to 39 . ( For a full breakdown of the tax credits , see page 2 of this summary . ) Right now , that ’ s probably more than most people ages 18 to 34 on exchanges receive in premium subsidies . But premium subsidies are based , in part , on the cost of premiums . If premiums keep rising by an average of 25 percent annually between now and 2020 , it ’ s possible that the AHCA ’ s tax credits will be less than the premium subsidies . For now , though , let ’ s call that a wash .
Much worse , the AHCA replaces the short-term incentive to purchase an insurance policy with a long-term incentive to not buy one . If you don ’ t purchase insurance under Obamacare , then the Internal Revenue Service deducts a penalty from any tax rebate you might receive . The AHCA replaces that penalty with a 30 percent surcharge that insurers can charge anyone who has allowed their coverage to lapse for more than 63 days .
It appears that younger people didn ’ t care much about the individual mandate . Thus , if younger people don ’ t care about a tax penalty that occurs annually , why will they care about a 30 percent surcharge that they likely won ’ t face for decades ? About 80 percent of health care expenses occur after the age of 40 , so most 18-to-34-year-olds can put off worrying about that surcharge for quite some time .
Indeed , thanks to Speaker Paul Ryan and other congressional Republicans , it is much easier to determine the optimal time to purchase health coverage . Say that you are in your late 50s and have knee problems that are going to require a joint replacement . Let ’ s say that a policy on the individual market would normally cost about $ 10,000 annually . But , since you haven ’ t had insurance in a while , the insurance company will add the surcharge , costing you $ 13,000 annually . If the knee replacement costs about $ 15,000 , then you are getting a pretty good deal . If you have a much more expensive illness like kidney failure , heart disease , or cancer , then that surcharge is a bargain ! ( And , to top it all off , insurers can only impose the surcharge for one year ! ) How likely is it that young people will be able to do such a calculation ? Well , rumor has it they are a lot of smart whipper-snappers in Silicon Valley , and it probably won ’ t be long before one of them creates the Paul-Ryan-30-Percent-Surcharge App for your smart phone .
Finally , would insurers even offer coverage in the individual market under these conditions ?
They are already dropping out of a market where the federal government is trying , albeit feebly , to provide incentives for people to purchase insurance before they get sick . Under the AHCA , people will have big incentives to avoid coverage until they are very sick . It ’ s hard to see how insurers make any money in that kind of market .
For insurance markets to work , people need to purchase insurance before they develop a serious illness , and the only way to make that work is to allow insurers to deny coverage to those with pre-existing conditions . Certainly , any bill that replaces Obamacare will need to provide assistance to people with pre-existing conditions , especially those who have bought insurance on the exchanges .
That said , before the unveiling of the AHCA it had been difficult to see how the individual insurance market could be made any worse than it is under Obamacare . Speaker Ryan may have just done it .