Skeptical Republicans and hopeful Democrats alike brushed aside the glowing report card on repairs to HealthCare.gov issued by the Obama administration Sunday , with lawmakers on both sides acknowledging the president ’ s team has tougher work ahead .
The Department of Health and Human Services said Sunday that it met the Dec. 1 deadline imposed by President Obama to fix major glitches plaguing HealthCare.gov . since the website ’ s nationwide debut two months ago .
Jeff Zients , a management consultant tapped by the White House to oversee the repair effort , said traffic on HealthCare.gov has increased .
“ HealthCare.gov , on Dec. 1 , is night and day from where it was on Oct. 1 , ” Mr. Zients said in a Sunday conference call with reporters .
“ Clearly , the rollout has been a disaster , and it ’ s still a work in progress , ” former Sen. Evan Bayh , Indiana Democrat , said on “ Fox News Sunday . ”
The website faces its toughest test yet as consumers who encountered early problems return to HealthCare.gov before the Dec. 23 enrollment deadline to gain coverage by Jan. 1 . Whether the website can handle another rush of users remains an open question .
Mr. Bayh said “ the jury is still out ” on the program ’ s long-term prospects but added , “ First impressions tend to be lasting , so it ’ s going to take some time in the court of public opinion to turn this thing around .
“ There are going to be more dislocations coming , ” said Mr. Bayh , who voted for the Affordable Care Act . “ Co-pays may go up , your doctor bill may go up , people may have their coverage dropped and have to go on the exchanges . That ’ s going to be disconcerting , so short term : troubling . It may be really problematic for the 2014 midterm elections . ”
Former Rep. Jane Harman , a California Democrat who also voted for the bill , was more optimistic . “ The rollout has been a mess , it ’ s hopefully better today , but what will matter is in six months or whatever the right time frame is : Will there be enough people across the spectrum from sick to healthy in the exchanges to create a competitive market so that the price of health care is affordable to those who have very little or no money ? ” she said on “ Fox News Sunday . ”
Former Vermont Gov . Howard Dean , a Democrat , cited the Massachusetts health care reform signed into law by Gov . Mitt Romney , a Republican , as an example of an effective program .
“ This is not from my point of view an ideal plan , but this is what passed the Congress and this is the law , and Romney did something very similar in Massachusetts , and it ’ s worked very well , ” Mr. Dean said on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union. ” “ I think we ought to make this thing work . ”
A CNN/ORC International poll released Friday found that 59 percent of Americans surveyed agreed that “ things are going badly , ” up from 53 percent in September and 50 percent in April .
Mr. Dean said speculation that the poll numbers reflect on Mr. Obama ’ s competence is “ nonsense . ”
“ It ’ s not nonsense , ” countered former Sen. Rick Santorum , Pennsylvania Republican . “ Massachusetts , by the way , has the highest insurance rates in country , so for all the ‘ good ’ it does , people pay a lot , and that ’ s what you ’ re going to see . When this website eventually gets fixed , the problems really begin for this administration . ”
Mr. Santorum predicted that Obamacare ’ s worst days are still ahead , saying the insurance plans offered have few doctors and hospitals in their networks , meaning that those who enroll on the federal health insurance exchange will have fewer options for medical care .
“ Why ? Because this bill set prices at such levels that doctors and hospitals , particularly the ones that are in high demand , do not participate in these programs , ” said Mr. Santorum , who lost to Mr. Romney in the 2012 Republican presidential primary .
One of the House ’ s most powerful Republicans , Rep. Mike Rogers of Michigan , said on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press ” that the administration still hasn ’ t proved the site is secure .
“ The security of this site and the private information does not meet even the minimal standards of the private sector , and that concerns me , ” said Mr. Rogers , who leads the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence . “ I don ’ t care if you ’ re for it or against it , Republican or Democrat , we should not tolerate the sheer level of incompetence securing this site . ”
The Affordable Care Act would have a better chance of succeeding if Republicans would stop criticizing it and give it their support , said Mr. Dean . The bill was approved in 2009 by House and Senate Democrats with no Republican votes .
“ For once , we ought to pull together and try to make this thing work . It can work , ” said Mr. Dean , who is a physician . “ Look , I was just as much of a critic of this bill as anybody else , but I think we ought to pull together and make the thing work , and I think it can work . I think 30 million more Americans are going to have health insurance , and there ’ s more work to be done . ”
Obamacare enrollment barely crested at 100,000 on the federal portal and state-run exchanges during the first month , raising serious questions about whether the administration can meet its projected goal of 7 million enrollees by the end of open enrollment on March 31 .
State-run exchanges reported a surge in enrollment during November , but it ’ s unclear whether the federal system will be able to match their success stories .
“ The status of HealthCare.gov in October was marked by an unacceptable user experience , ” Sunday ’ s report acknowledged . “ Consumers were experiencing slow response times and frequent , inexplicable error messages . The website experienced frequent outages . For some weeks in the month of October , the site was down an estimated 60 percent of the time . ”