A federal judge on Sunday partially blocked President Trump ’ s push to let a wide range of employers ignore an Obamacare-related rule requiring them to insure birth control in their health plans .
The preliminary injunction from U.S. District Judge Haywood Gilliam applies to 13 states , plus D.C .
Judge Gilliam , presiding in California , noted strong arguments on both sides of the debate over former President Barack Obama ’ s mandate , which devout business owners and religiously affiliated nonprofit employers have blasted as a violation of their faith or moral beliefs .
However , the judge was sympathetic to women who work for objecting employees and might lose access to affordable contraceptives .
The blue-state plaintiffs “ face potentially dire public health and fiscal consequences from the implementation of the final rules , ” the judge wrote .
Judge Gilliam , an appointee of President Barack Obama , enjoined the new rules in Connecticut , Delaware , Hawaii , Illinois , Maryland , Minnesota , New York , North Carolina , Rhode Island , Vermont , Virginia , Washington state and the nation ’ s capital .
Federal courts blocked Mr. Trump ’ s attempts to get around the mandate earlier this year , saying they were hastily written , so the administration finalized new rules in November .
The rules , set to take effect Monday , allow closely held businesses and faith-based charities and universities employers to refuse to insure forms of birth control they find objectionable by claiming “ sincerely held religious beliefs ” or a moral objection .
Objectors would not be required to fill out on opt-form — a requirement that Mr. Obama imposed , leading to dragged-out litigation that reached a deadlocked Supreme Court .
Today the court battles are coming from the other side , with civil-liberties groups saying Mr. Trump has made it too easy for employers to deny coverage .
The Health and Human Services Department disagrees , saying it expects no more than 200 employers to come forward a claim the latest version of the exemption , which only requires firms to notify their workers if their health policy suddenly drops contraceptive coverage .
California Attorney General Xavier Becerra , who is leading the court challenge , says the damage will be far more extensive .
“ It ’ s 2019 , yet the Trump Administration is still trying to roll back women ’ s rights , ” he tweeted . “ Our coalition will continue to fight to ensure women have access to the reproductive healthcare they are guaranteed under the law ! ”