Barack Obama ’ s legacy was always a leitmotif that hung in the background of this interminable 2016 election . On the one hand , Hillary Clinton ’ s vocal promise to preserve his achievements , and further his platform , was a political gambit—one Clinton presumably made to ensure the president ’ s voluble support , retain elements of his coalition , and reassure fretful Democrats who had seen Obama persevere through the obstructionist glee of Mitch McConnell , among others , that she would build upon perhaps the greatest bounty of progressive legislation enacted since Lyndon Johnson ’ s Great Society .
But Clinton 's constant invocation of Obama ’ s legacy was also , on some level , a reflection of pure political practicality . Constrained by an inflexible legislative branch for much of his time in office , the president relied heavily on executive orders to cut through gridlock on Capitol Hill . This was an effective tactic , but it would leave key pieces of legislation—most notably , the Affordable Care Act—vulnerable to an incoming Republican administration . So all Clinton had to do to maintain Obama ’ s legacy , and his programs , was win . But , to the everlasting amazement of many , she didn ’ t . As Donald Trump prepares to assume office in a couple months , buttressed by a Republican-controlled Congress , retribution season seems open .
And it will likely start with Obamacare . Since it was signed into law in March 2010 , the Affordable Care Act has weathered an onslaught of abiding attacks from the G.O.P . establishment . They all proved futile , of course , given Obama 's ability to veto opposition to his signature legislation . Now , a President Trump changes the calculus . During his campaign , Trump continuously declared that he would repeal Obamacare . In fact , the Trump-Pence Web site still notes , “ On day one of the Trump Administration , we will ask Congress to immediately deliver a full repeal of Obamacare . ”
Soon after his election , however , and in the wake of a personal meeting with the president , Trump subsequently softened his rhetoric . Now , it seems , he simply wants to revise the legislation . Nevertheless , Obamacare as we know it is likely to change .
But even tinkering with Obamacare , which came into the world amid sweltering political upheaval—a Senate supermajority , the looming swearing-in of Scott Brown , the pessimism of Rahm Emmanuel—could also present significant risk for the Trump administration . The pressure will be on Republicans to fix the $ 3 trillion U.S. health-care system they have derided for years—and they will have no one to blame but themselves if the insurance market is upended and millions of Americans lose coverage . Few would know the perils as intimately as Obama himself , who has already proffered a note of caution . “ I think that ’ s not going to be unique to me . I think the American people will respond that way , ” Obama warned of the potential blowback for taking on the health-care sector . “ I think on a lot of issues what you ’ re going to see is , now comes the hard part . Now is governance . ”
The rejection of Obamacare , which helped sweep Trump into office , was uppermost on his party ’ s mind after his surprise election victory . In the weeks since the Party of Lincoln secured near complete control over the U.S. government , G.O.P . leaders and the president-elect have been sharpening their knives to gut Obama ’ s signature health-care law . Less than 24 hours after the election was called , Mitch McConnell asserted that repealing Obamacare is “ pretty high ” on the Republican agenda . Paul Ryan quickly echoed the Senate majority leader ’ s sentiment . “ Obamacare is failing so it has to get replaced , quickly . That ’ s clearly high on our list , ” the Speaker of the House stressed during an interview with Fox News the Thursday after the election . And Trump was apparently considering convening a “ special session ” on Inauguration Day to discuss health-care reform , according to his campaign manager Kellyanne Conway .