WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Democrats see U.S. President Donald Trump becoming increasingly vulnerable to criticism about healthcare costs after the administration ’ s decision to scrap a proposal to lower drug prices , and 2020 White House candidates are rushing to seize the spotlight on the issue .
The debate over the future of the American healthcare system has become a focal point of the Democratic presidential nominating contest . As Trump has failed to make strides to remedy the problem , Democrats are becoming more vocal .
Some Democrats have been making big promises on healthcare , vowing to sweeping overhauls and complete government takeovers .
But even candidates like U.S . Senators Bernie Sanders and Elizabeth Warren , who would abolish private health insurance , are wading into the debate about lowering costs for consumers buying drugs in the current market .
Trump talked regularly about drug prices during his 2016 campaign , but has failed so far to deliver the changes he promised .
On Thursday his administration scrapped one of its most ambitious proposals for lowering prescription medicine prices , backing down from a policy aimed at health insurers and raising the possibility of new measures focused on drugmakers .
The abandoned proposal would have required health insurers to pass billions of dollars in rebates from drugmakers to Medicare patients .
Drug prices directly affect consumers , making it a more pressing concern for voters than debates over the structure of the healthcare system , said Robert Blendon , a political scientist at Harvard University who researches public opinion on healthcare .
Blendon said Trump , having failed to broker any deals in Congress , made his drug price plan too complicated , and voters are unlikely to see him as having made any strides . That is an opportunity for Democrats to offer their own effort at messaging .
A study Blendon produced earlier this year found that given a list of problems , nine out of 10 Americans chose the price of prescription drugs as an extremely important issue .
But voters ’ concerns do not extend to the stability or structure of government , with only 25 % saying they are concerned about the stability of Medicare .
“ Whoever gains anything politically out of this is going to have to talk about this ( so that ) it sounds like you understand , ” Blendon said . “ It really is a pocketbook issue . ”
On Thursday , U.S . Senators Kirsten Gillibrand unveiled a plan to lower drug prices . On Friday , Democrat Amy Klobuchar announced a plan to help lower the cost of pharmaceuticals purchased by seniors . Warren also has a Medicare pricing plan .
Sanders is heading to Canada later this month for an event to highlight the difference in the price of insulin .
Blendon said it was becoming obvious to candidates like Sanders that they can not peg their entire healthcare message to arguing for a universal system .
“ Medicare for all is not a top issue for older voters , ” Blendon said .
Klobuchar ’ s proposal , which includes investing in research for a cure for Alzheimer ’ s disease and improving the stability of Social Security , would allow the government to negotiate Medicare Part D costs , which cover prescriptions for seniors .
Klobuchar , a U.S. senator from Minnesota , would also let people order prescription drugs from countries like Canada , a proposal proponents say would lower costs .
Blendon said import changes are the most popular with voters , who fail to see how drugs from Canada or England are any more risky than ones made in the United States .