A record high number of voters now oppose the 2010 Affordable Care Act and a record low number supports it , according to the latest ███ poll .
In addition , a majority thinks the new law will increase their health care costs , while few think it will improve their quality of care .
The new poll finds 59 percent of voters oppose the health care law , up from 55 percent who opposed it six months ago ( June 2013 ) . The increase in opposition comes from both independents and Democrats .
Nearly a third of Democrats -- 30 percent -- oppose the law , up from 22 percent in June .
Opposition among independents went from 53 percent to 64 percent today .
Overall , 36 percent of voters favor the new health care law . That ’ s down from 40 percent in June and marks a new low .
Sixty-four percent of Democrats , 29 percent of independents and 11 percent of Republicans like the law .
Enrollment in the Obama health care exchanges began October 1 and the requirement to have qualifying coverage started January 1 .
Some apparent reasons for opposition to the law include the fact that majorities think the new law will increase their taxes ( 63 percent ) , increase their insurance costs ( 62 percent ) and increase the federal deficit ( 56 percent ) .
Meanwhile , just one voter in five thinks Obamacare will increase the quality of their health care ( 19 percent ) . More than twice as many expect the quality of their care to get worse ( 39 percent ) and another 37percent think it will stay the same .
By a 44-36 percent margin , voters think the quality of health care for all Americans will decrease rather than increase as a result of the new law .
Voters disapprove of the job President Obama is doing on health care by a 59-38 percent margin .
His highest rating on health care was 48 percent approval in September 2012 , while his lowest was 36 percent in November 2013 .
Some lawmakers are questioning the security of the health care exchanges and raise the possibility of identity theft for participants . The new poll finds 60 percent of voters lack confidence in the website ’ s ability to keep their information private . Thirty-seven percent are at least somewhat confident , including nine percent who are “ very ” confident .
The ███ poll is based on landline and cell phone interviews with 1,010 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research ( D ) and Shaw & Company Research ( R ) from January 19-21 , 2014 . The full poll has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points .