Congress returns to work Monday with election-year politics certain to shape an already limited agenda .
Republicans intend to focus on every facet of President Barack Obama 's health care law . They see a political boost in its problem-plagued rollout as the GOP looks to maintain its House majority and seize control of the Democratic-led Senate .
Do You Approve Or Disapprove of President Obama 's Job Performance ? Vote Now in Urgent Poll
First up in the House , according to Majority Leader Eric Cantor , R-Va. , is legislation addressing the security of personal data , part of his party 's effort `` to protect the American people from the harmful effects of Obamacare . ''
“ If a breach occurs , it shouldn ’ t be up to some bureaucrat to decide when or even whether to inform an individual that their personal information has been accessed , ” Cantor wrote in a memo to House Republicans , promising other steps to curb the healthcare law .
“ And in the coming weeks , we will continue to address other areas where greater transparency is demanded , including the disclosure of reliable and complete enrollment data , ” he wrote . “ These steps will be part of the overall effort to protect the American people from the harmful effects of Obamacare by ultimately repealing and replacing the law with patient-focused reforms that expand access , ensure quality care and help control costs . ”
Republicans also promise closer scrutiny of the administration 's tally of enrollment numbers in the program .
Democrats will press to raise the federal minimum wage from $ 7.25 an hour and extend unemployment benefits , trying to cast the party as more concerned with the less fortunate and intent on dealing with income inequality . The issues resonate with liberals , the core Democratic voters crucial in low-turnout midterm elections .
Rep. Steny Hoyer of Maryland , the No . 2 Democrat in the House , said an extension of federal benefits for an estimated 1.3 million Americans who saw their payments stopped on Dec. 28 is more than an economic issue .
`` It 's about real people , people with families struggling to put food on the table , to make ends meet , including ... 200,000 military veterans who are among these folks who are losing their benefits , '' he told reporters Friday .
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , D-Nev. , has scheduled a vote Monday night on legislation by Sens . Jack Reed , D-R.I. , and Dean Heller , R-Nev. , to extend jobless benefits for three months .
`` For decades , Republicans and Democrats put partisanship and ideology aside to offer some security for job-seekers , even when the unemployment rate was lower than it is today , '' President Barack Obama said Saturday in his weekly radio and Internet address . `` Instead of punishing families who can least afford it , Republicans should make it their New Year 's resolution to do the right thing , and restore this vital economic security for their constituents right now . ''
Rancor ruled in the first session of the 113th Congress with few bills passed and sent to the president . The combination of divided government and the upcoming elections stand as an obstacle to major legislation in the second session , counting down to November when all 435 House seats and 35 Senate seats will be on the ballot .
Still , Congress must deal with some significant unfinished business before delving deep into political votes and extended breaks for campaigning .
The Senate was to vote Monday on Obama 's nomination of Janet Yellen to become the head of the Federal Reserve . If confirmed , Yellen would become the first woman to fill the powerful post , replacing Ben Bernanke .
Lawmakers face a Jan. 15 deadline to agree on a spending bill to keep the government running and avoid a partial shutdown that roiled Congress last fall . Passage of legislation in December scaling back the automatic , across-the board cuts gave the House and Senate Appropriations Committees time to draft a massive , trillion-dollar-plus measure to run the government through September .
A short-term measure is likely this month just to let the government continue operating .
The GOP-controlled House and Democratic-led Senate spent a chunk of last year wrangling over renewing the nation 's farm bill after passing separate , competing versions of the five-year , roughly $ 500 billion measure . In dispute are crop subsidies and how deeply to cut the $ 80 billion-a-year food stamp program , with the House slashing $ 4 billion and the Senate $ 400 million annually .
Lawmakers are pressing for a compromise that can win approval from the House and Senate .
Twenty-six senators have signed on to a new Iran sanctions bill that Obama opposes while his administration negotiates with the Iranian government over its nuclear program . Proponents of the legislation are seeking to gain the support of further senators when Congress reconvenes , with the hope of securing a full Senate vote this month .
Although the issue may not be an immediate legislative priority for returning lawmakers , it could become a major point of discussion as advocates and opponents of fresh penalties make their cases .
Reid spared the administration a vote in December , but this month he may not be able to hold off proponents of tough sanctions .
The majority leader did promise Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand , D-N.Y. , a vote on her legislation to give victims of rape and sexual assault in the military an independent route outside the chain of command for prosecuting attackers . Her solution would take the decision from commanders and give it to seasoned military lawyers .
The top echelon of the military , the Democratic chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee and other Senate Democrats and Republicans oppose her plan . Reid backs , it as do several top conservatives such as Sens . Ted Cruz , R-Texas , and Rand Paul , R-Ky. , but Gillibrand is still short of the 60-vote , filibuster-proof threshold .
Unclear is whether the House will tackle major legislation to overhaul immigration laws . Advocates remain hopeful , buoyed by Speaker John Boehner 's hire of a Senate aide who worked on bipartisan immigration legislation for Sen. John McCain , R-Ariz. , and Boehner 's willingness to stand up to outside conservative groups and tea partyers over the budget .
Boehner and Obama have spoken about a piecemeal approach after the comprehensive Senate measure stalled in the House . But some House Republicans still resist any legislation , fearing it would lead to negotiations with the Senate and a final bill that includes a path to citizenship for the 11 million immigrants living in the country illegally .