Democrats have assailed the way House Republicans handled repealing and replacing ObamaCare , describing the legislative process as a sham .
For Republicans , much of the criticism should have a familiar ring , as it echoes the attacks that the GOP leveled against Democrats in 2009 and 2010 during the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) debate .
Republicans rode a wave of anger over ObamaCare to electoral victory in 2010 , and they haven ’ t relinquished their House majority since . Now , Democrats have been using the GOP ’ s own playbook against them .
Democrats “ can start the ads now , ” said Julius Hobson , an attorney and former lobbyist with the American Medical Association . “ Now you get to attack every GOP House member and say he or she was the margin of victory to take away your healthcare benefits , ” just like the Republicans did when ObamaCare passed .
Accusations of hypocrisy flew fast and heavy from Democrats this week , as the House passed an ObamaCare repeal bill after struggling with the contents for more than two months .
The bill was passed without an updated score from the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) , the nonpartisan scorekeeper of legislation , and lawmakers had little time to review the updated text before the floor vote .
Republicans “ got [ the bill ] out of the House , albeit by a narrow margin , but they violated every norm and pledge about how to get legislation through the House ” that they ’ ve made , said Jim Manley , a former spokesman for former Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid Harry Mason ReidHarry Reid predicts Trump , unlike Clinton , wo n't become more popular because of impeachment Al Franken to host SiriusXM radio show Pressure on Pelosi to impeach Trump grows MORE ( D-Nev. ) .
During the debate over ObamaCare , Republicans repeatedly accused Democrats of rushing a massive bill through Congress without knowing what was in it or how much it would cost .
Those criticisms came from none other than Rep. Paul Ryan Paul Davis RyanDemocrats hit Scalia over LGBTQ rights Three-way clash set to dominate Democratic debate Krystal Ball touts Sanders odds in Texas MORE ( R-Wis. ) , now the Speaker of the House .
“ Before members even had time to read the 1,000-page bill , it already has cleared two major House committees , ” Ryan wrote in a 2009 op-ed in the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel . “ Those members of Congress who voted for this bill already in their committees did so without knowing what the legislation costs . ”
“ We ’ ve been talking about repealing and replacing ObamaCare for seven years . That ’ s the first time that I ’ ve had anybody say that we rushed anything , ” House Freedom Caucus Chairman Mark Meadows ( R-N.C. ) said Wednesday .
Democrats railed against Republicans this week for passing the healthcare bill without an updated CBO score .
On March 18 , 2010 — three days before the final ACA vote in the House — the official Twitter account of the House GOP asked , “ Will Speaker Pelosi ‘ Wait for the Final Number ’ from the CBO ? ” The score was released that day .
The GOP legislation , known as the American Health Care Act , would allow states to opt out of covering ObamaCare provisions preventing insurers from charging sick people higher premiums and mandating minimum insurance coverage requirements so long as high-risk pools are offered .
White House press secretary Sean Spicer insisted the bill would actually “ strengthen ” coverage for people with pre-existing conditions , though he added it is “ literally impossible ” to predict the effects of the bill .
After the House passed the bill , House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) said `` forcing a vote without a CBO score shows that the Republicans are afraid of the facts . ”
The CBO hasn ’ t analyzed any aspects of the bill since it was pulled from the floor in March . The agency at that time determined that 24 million people would lose insurance coverage over 10 years if the legislation passed .
Another popular claim from Republicans was that ObamaCare was negotiated and passed in the dead of night , behind closed doors and without one Republican vote . Democrats can counter they held numerous hearings , town halls and industry listening sessions .
The House GOP worked for seven years to repeal the ACA , but held just two marathon markups of the bill that they passed last week , along with a quick session at the Budget Committee .
Republicans might also recognize the impassioned floor speech Pelosi made just moments before the vote on Thursday .
In a back-and-forth with Democrats , Pelosi echoed the infamous “ hell no ” speech given by then-Speaker John Boehner John Andrew BoehnerIs Congress retrievable ? Boehner reveals portrait done by George W. Bush Meadows to be replaced by Biggs as Freedom Caucus leader MORE ( R-Ohio ) moments before the 2010 House vote on ObamaCare .
“ I ’ m sure somewhere Boehner John Andrew BoehnerIs Congress retrievable ? Boehner reveals portrait done by George W. Bush Meadows to be replaced by Biggs as Freedom Caucus leader MORE was hoisting a glass of his favorite red wine and laughing , ” Hobson said . “ If you stay in this business long enough , you ’ ll see the roles reverse . ”