GOP senators unveiled their new plan to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act on Thursday after spending nearly two weeks making revisions , but it 's already teetering on the edge of collapse .
Interested in Health Care Overhaul ? Add Health Care Overhaul as an interest to stay up to date on the latest Health Care Overhaul news , video , and analysis from ███ . Add Interest
If just three Republicans oppose the procedural vote scheduled for next week , the GOP 's seven-year effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act would come to an end .
Two Republican senators have already said they plan to vote `` no '' on the procedural vote next week : Sens . Susan Collins of Maine and Rand Paul of Kentucky .
`` As a conservative , I wo n't support the new federal spending or entitlements or bailouts , '' Paul told reporters shortly after the revised draft was released Thursday .
For Collins , who is known as a moderate on health care , the issue comes down to the deep cuts to Medicaid funding proposed in the revised draft .
`` My strong inclination and current intention is to vote 'no ' on the motion to proceed , '' Collins said Thursday .
`` I look forward to reviewing the revised Senate health care legislation and forthcoming CBO report to determine the impact on West Virginians , but continue to have serious concerns about the Medicaid provisions , '' Sen. Shelley Moore Capito , R-WV , said Thursday in a statement .
Sen . Rob Portman of Ohio , who also expressed serious concerns about Medicaid cuts said he is undecided .
`` It 's 172 pages guys , so I 've got a weekend of reading , '' Sen. Dean Heller of Nevada told reporters on his way out of the U.S. Capitol .
But with or without his party 's support , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has vowed to take up the procedural vote , in order to open debate on the Senate floor .
President Donald Trump weighed in Friday morning , tweeting : `` Republicans Senators are working hard to get their failed ObamaCare replacement approved . I will be at my desk , pen in hand ! ''
Some of the revisions in this version of the bill include : maintaining some Obamacare taxes for the wealthy , allowing people to pay for insurance with pre-tax money and providing financial support to help low-income people purchase healthcare .
In an effort to address some concerns voiced by moderates , the revised bill also includes a $ 45 billion dollar sweetener to fight the opioid epidemic .
To address some conservative concerns , the new version includes an amendment that Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas introduced , which would allow insurers to offer cheaper bare-bones plans that don ’ t cover essential health benefits . This addition could bring down costs for some , but has caused contention with some moderate senators because it could hurt those with pre-existing conditions .
The Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) plans to release it 's analysis of the revised plan 's potential effect on the budget early next week . They are analyzing two versions of the bill , one with the `` bare-bones '' amendment and one without .
If the procedural vote is successful , an amendment process will begin , meaning the bill will be a work-in-progress until the final vote .