The Senate voted Wednesday to advance a controversial bill that would both avert a government shutdown while defunding ObamaCare , after Sen. Ted Cruz delivered a marathon 21-hour speech in a bid to rally public opposition to the health care law .
Despite Cruz 's efforts , Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid was moving swiftly to try and strike the ObamaCare language , leaving only a stopgap spending bill that would keep the government open until mid-November . Reid teed up another test vote for Friday , leaving more standoffs with Republicans on the horizon in both chambers .
Without an agreement , the government will partially shut down on Oct. 1 , but some Republicans continue to demand that the health law be de-funded in exchange for a budget bill .
`` ObamaCare is n't working , '' Cruz said Wednesday , as he departed the Senate floor after speaking in opposition to the law from Tuesday afternoon straight through until noon on Wednesday .
Reid countered that his floor speech was a `` big waste of time '' and only brought the government closer to a shutdown .
`` With all due respect , I 'm not sure we learned anything new , '' Reid said .
Cruz 's speech was a symbolic stand , as he was not actually able to stall the bill at this point . In the end , he and every other senator voted to advance the bill and proceed to debate . The vote was 100-0 . But Cruz , anticipating that Reid will re-fund ObamaCare , is trying to rally Republicans and moderate Democrats to join in blocking the bill before it comes to a final vote . Another test vote , which will require 60 senators to proceed , is expected on Friday .
What comes next is a complicated set of procedural maneuvers , with no clear outcome .
Reid hopes to put up a clean bill that simply keeps the government open past Sept. 30 , and send it the House by the end of the weekend . If Reid can muster the votes , majority Republicans in the House will then have to decide whether to stand by their demand that the health law be defunded and risk a government shutdown , or pass the Senate bill -- in turn keeping the government open , but allowing key parts of the controversial health law to launch in early October .
Speaking in support of the health law , Sen. Charles Schumer , D-N.Y. , claimed his party is in a better position going into the final stretch before the end-of-the-month deadline .
`` Senator Cruz has actually advanced our cause . He has alienated some of his colleagues . He has united Democrats . And he has shown the American people he is willing to hold them and their wellbeing hostage unless he gets his way , '' he said .
From Tuesday afternoon until noon on Wednesday , Cruz -- with occasional remarks by Sen. Mike Lee , R-Utah , and other GOP conservatives -- controlled the Senate floor and railed against ObamaCare . At 10:41 a.m. EDT Wednesday , Cruz and his allies reached the 20-hour mark , the fourth-longest Senate speech since precise record-keeping began in 1900 .
That exceeded March 's 12-hour , 52-minute speech by Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky. , like Cruz a tea party lawmaker and potential 2016 presidential contender , and filibusters by such Senate icons as Huey Long of Louisiana and Robert Byrd of West Virginia .
Cruz said he has learned that defying party leaders is `` survivable , '' adding , `` Ultimately , it is liberating '' and that his long evening involved `` sometimes some pain , sometimes fatigue . ''
But he added , `` You know what ? There 's far more pain in rolling over . ... Far more pain in not standing up for principle . ''