Republicans have left Washington for the August recess with healthcare decisions hanging overhead , many of which must be addressed by the end of September .
While the GOP attempt at repealing ObamaCare has stalled for now , some in the party are not giving up .
`` This ai n't over by a long shot … we wo n't rest until we end the ObamaCare nightmare once and for all , ” Vice President Pence said at the Tennessee GOP 2017 Statesmen 's Dinner Thursday , according to a pool report .
Yet Republicans are running out of time to take action , as the legislative vehicle they were using to gut the healthcare law and avoid a Democratic filibuster expires at the end of September .
Sens . Lindsey Graham Lindsey Olin GrahamIntel community watchdog appears to push back on Trump allegations of changes to whistleblower rules Democrats demand Barr , senior officials testify on Ukraine ███ 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff MORE ( R-S.C. ) and Bill Cassidy ( R-La . ) are pushing a new plan to redirect money currently spent on providing coverage through ObamaCare and instead give it to states to spend as they choose .
They have been meeting with White House officials , who are also pushing Congress not to give up on repeal .
“ I hope that our leadership will pay attention to this effort , because the idea of leaving ObamaCare without a replacement is pretty naive , ” Graham said this week .
Still , Senate GOP leadership has largely signaled they are moving on from repeal for now , with the legislative session in September likely to be dominated by work on funding the government and raising the debt ceiling .
And there are so far no signs that any of the three GOP “ no ” votes who sunk repeal , Sens . Lisa Murkowski Lisa Ann MurkowskiRepublicans show signs of discomfort in defense of Trump GOP battens down the hatches after release of Trump whistleblower complaint Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran MORE ( Alaska ) , Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsYes , President Trump , we do have a homelessness crisis and you 're making it harder for us to address The policy-driven presidential campaign could be drowned out by impeachment Flake tells GOP : Trump 'does not deserve reelection ' MORE ( Maine ) and John McCain John Sidney McCainCindy McCain : I can see Arizona 'going Democrat ' in 2020 Ukraine scandal shows that foreign influence is a bipartisan affair America 's newest comedy troupe : House GOP MORE ( Ariz. ) , are changing their minds .
However , Graham said he is working with conservative Sens . Mike Lee Michael ( Mike ) Shumway LeeIntel community watchdog appears to push back on Trump allegations of changes to whistleblower rules To win the federal paid family leave debate , allow states to lead the way GOP opposition threatens to sink Trump 's ATF pick MORE ( R-Utah ) and Ted Cruz Rafael ( Ted ) Edward CruzHillicon Valley : Treasury sanctions Russians over 2018 election meddling | How Facebook fought back on FTC fine | WeWork calls off IPO | Elon Musk unveils Mars rocket Cambridge Analytica whistleblower 's book coming out next week O'Rourke : Trump should resign MORE ( R-Texas ) to try to incorporate their ideas on repealing ObamaCare regulations into his plan .
And Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison ( Mitch ) Mitchell McConnellOvernight Defense : Dems subpoena Giuliani for Ukraine docs | DOJ says Trump contacted foreign countries over Russia inquiry | Top Armed Services Republican Thornberry to retire | Milley sworn in as top general ███ 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff US sanctions Russian individuals for interference in 2018 elections MORE ( R-Ky. ) left the door open to bringing repeal back in some form , noting the fast-track procedure being used to avoid a filibuster had not expired .
Lawmakers are ramping up bipartisan talks on the next steps for healthcare legislation , some more enthusiastically than others .
Sen. Mike Rounds ( R-S.D . ) said that following the failure of the Senate GOP ’ s ObamaCare repeal vote , Democrats have been more willing to talk with Republicans about ways to fix the law .
“ Both sides are moving a little bit more to the middle , ” Rounds said . “ The discussions I ’ m having have been positive with Democrats , saying , ‘ Look , we are open to these changes , we will listen , we will work with you . ’ ”
Sen. Roy Blunt Roy Dean BluntRepublicans show signs of discomfort in defense of Trump Congress hunts for offramp from looming shutdown fight Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran MORE ( R-Mo . ) , a member of the GOP leadership , told ███ he still wants to repeal ObamaCare “ and start over , but that doesn ’ t mean an effort to hold up the collapsing structure in the short term isn ’ t the right thing to do . ”
Both the Senate ’ s Health and Finance committees plan to hold bipartisan hearings in September when lawmakers return from recess .
Sen. Lamar Alexander Andrew ( Lamar ) Lamar AlexanderGOP battens down the hatches after release of Trump whistleblower complaint Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran Senate again votes to end Trump emergency declaration on border wall MORE ( R-Tenn. ) — the chairman of the Health Committee — said the goal is for the panel to craft a bipartisan , short-term proposal by mid-September , as insurers must sign contracts saying they ’ ll sell plans on the federal exchange by the end of that month .
Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch Orrin Grant HatchTrump to award racing legend Roger Penske with Presidential Medal of Freedom Trump awards Presidential Medal of Freedom to economist , former Reagan adviser Arthur Laffer Second ex-Senate staffer charged in aiding doxxing of GOP senators MORE ( R-Utah ) did not suggest the panel would produce legislation , but he said there was bipartisan interest in a hearing .
“ We ’ ve also heard a lot of demands from members of the committee for a healthcare hearing . I intend to do that as well shortly after the recess , ” Hatch said Thursday .
But it ’ s not clear that the renewed interest in bipartisanship will yield legislation .
Alexander ’ s committee runs the ideological gamut from conservative Sen. Rand Paul Randal ( Rand ) Howard PaulSenate passes stopgap spending bill , sending it to Trump Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran Senate again votes to end Trump emergency declaration on border wall MORE ( R-Ky. ) to progressive Sens . Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth Ann WarrenOvernight Health Care : Dem seeks changes to Pelosi drug pricing bill | Trump officials shift family planning funds from Planned Parenthood | CVS halts sales of Zantac over cancer concerns Saagar Enjeti calls Warren 's credibility into question Krystal Ball : Potential Ocasio-Cortez endorsement of Sanders would be ' a no-brainer ' MORE ( D-Mass . ) and Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersUkraine whistleblower coverage has n't impacted Biden favorability : poll Saagar Enjeti calls Warren 's credibility into question Krystal Ball : Potential Ocasio-Cortez endorsement of Sanders would be ' a no-brainer ' MORE ( I-Vt. ) .
Getting everyone behind a bill could prove a tall order , especially as some Republicans like Paul are committed to repealing ObamaCare , not repairing it .
Should we back legislation to make key payments to insurers ?
Insurers are desperate to know whether they ’ re going to continue to receive critical ObamaCare payments from the federal government .
President Trump has threatened to halt the payments , which compensate insurers for subsidizing out-of-pocket costs for certain healthcare consumers .
But Congress could take the matter out of his hands by authorizing the payments the administration has been making on a monthly basis , which total about $ 7 billion for fiscal 2017 .
Even if Trump doesn ’ t halt the cost-sharing reduction payments , a yearlong appropriation from Congress would give insurers certainty that they ’ ll continue to receive the funds .
Many say the ObamaCare marketplaces need to be stabilized and are open to funding the payments . Alexander took the first concrete step forward to do so , saying that any stabilization package his committee produces should fund the payments .
“ I think it is a mistake to simply go forward with bailouts for big insurance companies , ” Cruz said . “ For whatever reason , the Democrats ’ central priority seems to be providing billions of dollars in subsidies and bailouts to giant insurance companies . ”
Time is of the essence for Congress to reauthorize the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program ( CHIP ) . Funding is set to expire Sept. 30 .
CHIP has historically had bipartisan support , and the Senate Finance Committee announced on Thursday it would hold a post-recess hearing on CHIP .
Congress last reauthorized the CHIP program in 2015 as part of a broader health package .
However , for Republicans still searching for a way to pass provisions of their failed ObamaCare repeal legislation , the authorizing legislation may be a tempting vehicle .
If CHIP funding expires , states will be forced to make difficult decisions about coverage . Millions of families would have to find other sources of insurance for their children at a time of uncertainty around the stability , availability and affordability of other types of coverage .
Insurance commissioners have a big fear : That the ObamaCare health marketplaces will open for business , but people in some areas won ’ t have any plans to choose from .
This scenario has never happened before , but as of Friday , 17 counties have zero insurers committed to their exchange , according to Kaiser Family Foundation .
The deadline to participate is looming . Insurers sign contracts with the federal government at the end of September , saying they ’ ll offer plans on the ObamaCare exchanges .
If the Senate Health Committee is able to meet its goal — hammering out a bipartisan short-term stabilization bill by mid-September — then that could help prevent more insurers from fleeing the marketplaces .
And behind the scenes , insurance commissioners have been offering insurers previously unheard of flexibilities to keep or entice them into the marketplaces .
Congress is aware of the situation and has proposed several other solutions .
One bill from Tennessee ’ s Republican senators , Bob Corker Robert ( Bob ) Phillips CorkerTrump announces , endorses ambassador to Japan 's Tennessee Senate bid Meet the key Senate player in GOP fight over Saudi Arabia Trump says he 's 'very happy ' some GOP senators have 'gone on to greener pastures ' MORE and Alexander , would let people use their ObamaCare subsidies to purchase plans off the exchange — that is , if they live in a “ bare county ” without any ObamaCare plans to buy .
A counter bill from Sen. Claire McCaskill Claire Conner McCaskillEx-CIA chief worries campaigns falling short on cybersecurity Ocasio-Cortez blasts NYT editor for suggesting Tlaib , Omar are n't representative of Midwest Trump nominees meet fiercest opposition from Warren , Sanders , Gillibrand MORE ( D-Mo . ) would allow those in bare counties to buy coverage on Washington , D.C. ’ s exchange , where Congress members and their staff purchase insurance .