New Orleans ( CNN ) Chief Justice John Roberts saved Obamacare in 2012 by calling it a tax . Now , his core argument is helping power a Republican-led legal challenge that threatens to sweep away the entire law .
The Affordable Care Act faces its third major legal test since President Barack Obama signed it in 2010 , putting access to health insurance for millions of Americans and coverage for those with pre-existing conditions , such as cancer and diabetes , into question .
The appeals court case , heard in New Orleans on Tuesday , may also complicate the legacy of the chief justice , who has attempted to keep the Supreme Court out of politics but could soon face another presidential election-year health care dispute .
Roberts , a 2005 appointee of Republican George W. Bush , forged a compromise in 2012 with the four Supreme Court liberal justices to uphold the signature domestic achievement of Obama .
In dramatic moves behind the scenes , Roberts shifted multiple times in that landmark Obamacare challenge . After the 2012 case was argued , Roberts was part of a five-justice majority that wanted to strike down the individual insurance mandate . But he became wary of voiding a significant part of the law that was years in the making and reconsidered .
That eventual 2012 decision has shaped public perceptions of the chief justice , who since then has been viewed with skepticism by conservatives even as his record -- for example , on racial issues , campaign finance and religion -- remains solidly on the right .
Roberts ' opinion is now at the center of the legal debate seven years later .
His 2012 rationale for upholding the ACA 's individual insurance mandate was tied to Congress ' taxing power . Texas and other Republican-led states , backed by the Trump administration , contend that when Congress zeroed out the tax penalty in 2017 for people who failed to obtain insurance , it eviscerated its constitutional grounds .
`` The entire basis , '' for the 2012 decision , Texas solicitor general Kyle Hawkins argued Tuesday , `` is now off the table . '' Without the linchpin of the individual insurance mandate , he said , the entire law must fall .
Lawyers for California and other Democratic-led states , along with the Democratic-run US House of Representatives , countered on Tuesday that even without a tax penalty , the individual mandate remains constitutional , as does the entire ACA .
`` There 's another way to read '' the 2012 Roberts ' decision , insisted Douglas Letter , counsel for the US House . He argued that Roberts ' opinion said people had a choice whether to buy insurance or face a tax penalty . Letter said that choice remains , even if the tax penalty is zero .
`` The choice that Chief Justice Roberts made clear to all of us is there , '' he said , stressing that the chief sought a way to preserve the law on some constitutional grounds . `` I know Texas is unhappy with what Chief Justice Roberts did . They wish he had done something different . But he did n't . ... And that is binding . ''
The future of the health-insurance overhaul appears destined to return to the Supreme Court and Roberts , whose views on the 2017 tax change are not known .
Last December , a US district court judge agreed with the Republican challengers and ruled that because the tax penalty is now zero , the entire health care law is unconstitutional . On Tuesday , a panel of the 5th US Circuit Court of Appeals appeared poised to find that at least a significant part of the ACA should fall , if not all of it .
That panel is not expected to rule for several months . When it does , the case of Texas v. United States is likely bound for the Supreme Court where , despite recent changes among the nine , the majority that previously upheld the law -- Roberts and four liberal justices -- is still there .
This new case could be the most consequential test of Obamacare yet . Millions of Americans now obtain their health insurance through the ACA-created exchanges or Medicaid expansion . Among the law 's provisions , people with cancer , diabetes or other pre-existing conditions can not be refused coverage and children can stay on their parents ' health insurance plans until they turn 26 .
The Trump administration initially argued that , based on the 2017 tax law change , only the individual mandate and two related provisions tied to protections for people pre-existing health conditions should be invalidated . But now its Justice Department is agreeing with Texas that the entire law should be struck down because , they insist , the law 's many provisions are intertwined .
If one is unconstitutional , so is the rest , they say -- a ruling that if upheld could give Trump the result of killing Obamacare that he could n't accomplish with a GOP-controlled Congress in 2017 .
A majority of the three-judge panel on Tuesday signaled by their questions that they were sympathetic to that position .
The 100-minute hearing was dominated by two Republican-appointed judges : Jennifer Elrod , named by President George W. Bush , and Kurt Engelhardt , appointed by President Donald Trump . The third judge -- Carolyn Dineen King , named to the bench by Democrat Jimmy Carter -- asked no questions during the hearing .
When House counsel Letter argued that judges should follow Roberts ' approach to save the ACA in 2012 , Elrod suggested she believed the 2017 tax change altered Roberts ' premise in the case of National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius .
Elrod asserted that linking the individual mandate to a `` revenue-producing '' measure was `` essential . ''
Engelhardt questioned why , after a US district judge declared the whole ACA unconstitutional , Congress did not pass legislation clarifying what provisions should stay on the books .
`` Why does Congress want the ... judiciary to become the taxidermist for every legislative big-game accomplishment that Congress achieves ? '' Engelhardt asked .
Letter responded in part by repeating the traditional Supreme Court principle that judges should uphold as much of a piece of legislation as possible when one part is found invalid .
If judges follow the lessons of the Supreme Court majority , Letter insisted to the 5th Circuit panel , `` you will keep in place the overwhelming percentage of the Affordable Care Act . ''
The positions of Republican appointees Elrod and Engelhardt , while no doubt arising from valid constitutional concerns , reinforced the partisan cast of the case that has pitted red states against blue states , the Republican Trump administration against the Democratic House .
Such political currents would likely draw the notice of Roberts , who has been trying to keep the US judiciary above the partisan fray . The simple makeup of the high court does not make that easy .
The five conservatives , including Roberts , were appointed by Republican presidents . The four liberals were appointed by Democrats . They often vote along ideological , if not political , lines .
In the recently completed Supreme Court session , however , Roberts inched to the left in key cases and appeared to be trying to bridge the court 's divide in these politically volatile times .
Those moves recalled the Obamacare decision that , even seven years later , defines him in the public eye .