WASHINGTON/SAN FRANCISCO ( ███ ) - Eighteen U.S. states sued President Donald Trump ’ s administration on Friday to stop him from scrapping a key component of Obamacare , subsidies to insurers that help millions of low-income people pay medical expenses , even as Trump invited Democratic leaders to negotiate a deal .
One day after his administration announced plans to end the payments next week , Trump said he would dismantle Obamacare “ step by step . ”
His latest action raised concerns about chaos in insurance markets . The subsidies cost $ 7 billion this year and were estimated at $ 10 billion for 2018 , according to congressional analysts .
“ As far as the subsidies are concerned , I don ’ t want to make the insurance companies rich , ” Trump told reporters at the White House . “ They ’ re making a fortune by getting that kind of money . ”
Trump ’ s action took aim at a critical element of the 2010 law , his Democratic predecessor Barack Obama ’ s signature domestic policy achievement . Frustrated by the failure of his fellow Republicans who control both houses of Congress to repeal and replace Obamacare , Trump has taken several steps to chip away at it .
Democratic attorneys general from the 18 states as well as Washington , D.C. , filed a lawsuit in federal court in California later on Friday . The states include : California , Connecticut , Delaware , Kentucky , Illinois , Iowa , Maryland , Massachusetts , Minnesota , New Mexico , New York , North Carolina , Oregon , Pennsylvania , Rhode Island , Vermont , Virginia and Washington state .
The states will ask the court to force Trump to make the next payment . Legal experts said the states were likely to face an uphill battle in court .
Related Coverage Trump says Democratic leaders should come to White House to negotiate healthcare deal
“ His effort to gut these subsidies with no warning or even a plan to contain the fallout is breathtakingly reckless , ” New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman said . “ This is an effort simply to blow up the system . ”
The new lawsuit would be separate from a case pending before an appeals court in the District of Columbia in which 16 Democratic state attorneys general are defending the legality of the payments .
If the subsidies vanish , low-income Americans who obtain insurance through Obamacare online marketplaces where insurers can sell policies would face higher insurance premiums and out-of-pocket medical costs . It would particularly hurt lower-middle-class families whose incomes are still too high to qualify for certain government assistance .
About 10 million people are enrolled in Obamacare through its online marketplaces , and most receive subsidies . Trump ’ s action came just weeks before the period starting on Nov. 1 when individuals have to begin enrolling for 2018 insurance coverage through the law ’ s marketplaces .
The administration will not make the next payment to insurers , scheduled for Wednesday , U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions said .
Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer expressed optimism about chances for a deal with Republicans to continue the subsidy payments .
“ We ’ re going to have a very good opportunity to get this done in a bipartisan way ” during negotiations in December on broad federal spending legislation , “ if we can ’ t get it done sooner , ” Schumer told reporters .
Trump offered an invitation for Democratic leaders to come to the White House , while also lashing out at them . “ We ’ ll negotiate some deal that ’ s good for everybody . But they ’ re always a bloc vote against everything . They ’ re like obstructionists , ” Trump told reporters .
U.S. President Donald Trump smiles after signing an Executive Order to make it easier for Americans to buy bare-bone health insurance plans and circumvent Obamacare rules at the White House in Washington , U.S. , October 12 , 2017 . ███/Kevin Lamarque TPX IMAGES OF THE DAY
The Senate failed in both July and September to pass legislation backed by Trump to repeal Obamacare due to opposition by a handful of Republican senators . One of them , Susan Collins , a moderate Republican from Maine who had been contemplating running for governor next year , on Friday said she planned to remain in the Senate and would use her voice in reforming the healthcare system .
Hospitals , doctors , health insurers , state insurance commissioners and patient advocates decried Trump ’ s move , saying consumers will ultimately pay the price . They called on Congress to appropriate the funds needed to keep up the subsidy payments .
Shares of U.S. hospital companies and health insurers closed down on Friday after the subsidies announcement . Centene Corp ( CNC.N ) closed down 3.3 percent and Molina Healthcare ( MOH.N ) closed down 3.4 percent . Among hospital shares , Tenet Healthcare ( THC.N ) finished 5.1 percent lower and Community Health Systems ( CYH.N ) declined 4.0 percent .
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office has estimated that erasing the subsidies would increase the federal deficit by $ 194 billion over the next decade because the government still would be obligated under other parts of Obamacare to help lower-income people pay for insurance premiums .
Trump , who as a candidate last year promised to roll back the law formally called the Affordable Care Act , received applause for his latest action during an appearance on Friday before a group of conservative voters .
“ It ’ s step by step by step , and that was a very big step yesterday , ” Trump said . “ And one by one , it ’ s going to come down , and we ’ re going to have great healthcare in our country . ”
Earlier on Twitter he called Obamacare “ a broken mess ” that is “ imploding , ” and referred to the “ pet insurance companies ” of Democrats .
Republicans for seven years had vowed to get rid of Obamacare , but deep intra-party divisions have scuttled their efforts to get legislation through the Senate , where they hold a slim majority .
Since taking office in January , Trump threatened many times to cut the subsidies . Health insurers that planned to stay in the Obamacare market prepared for the move in many states by submitting two sets of premium rates to regulators : with and without the subsidies .
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners said the change would drive up premium costs for consumers by at least 12 to 15 percent in 2018 and cut more than $ 1 billion in payments to insurers for 2017 .
The White House announced the cut-off just hours after Trump signed an order intended to allow insurers to sell lower-cost , bare-bones policies with limited benefits and consumer protections .
Republicans have called Obamacare an unnecessary government intrusion into the American healthcare system . Democrats have said the law needs some fixes but noted that it had brought insurance to 20 million people .