Democrats created a shaky system ; Republicans have now made it worse .
Seemingly lost in the news of last week ’ s big tax-cut victory for the GOP was the repeal of the individual mandate — the Obamacare provision that required Americans to have health coverage or else pay a penalty .
This is , to borrow a phrase from Vice President Joe Biden , a “ big f * * * ing deal. ” It is a big victory for conservatives , who disdained the mandate as government coerciveness . But from a broader perspective , the rise and fall of the mandate is yet another example of how Congress struggles to regulate the national economy .
In National Federation of Independent Businesses v. Sebelius ( 2012 ) , the Supreme Court nearly repealed the entirety of Obamacare because of the mandate . The individual mandate , a majority of justices almost concluded ( before Chief Justice John Roberts switched his vote ) , was inconsistent with the power granted to Congress under the interstate-commerce clause . And because the individual mandate was so integral to the architecture of Obamacare , the Court was obliged to strike down the whole law .
Congressional Republicans have now done exactly what the Supreme Court thought it could not do : They have ditched the mandate without repealing or replacing the rest of Obamacare . What is that going to do for the individual insurance marketplace ?
Recall the mechanics of Obamacare . Insurers were limited in how much they could charge older enrollees relative to younger ones , were prohibited from considering preexisting conditions , and also had to provide certain guaranteed benefits . All of this was bound to increase the cost of insurance — which would disincentivize healthy people from getting coverage , exacerbating the problem . Enter the individual mandate : Healthy people who did not purchase insurance would be penalized by the government , in the form of a fine . That would give healthy people a reason to sign up , thus creating a more balanced risk pool and thereby keeping costs low .
Congressional Republicans , by taking the mandate away , have thus kicked one of the major props out from underneath Obamacare , without reforming the overall structure . What ’ s worse , they applied the budgetary savings from repealing the mandate to their tax cut , instead of making it a down payment on a replacement plan .
There is no way around the fact that congressional Republicans have behaved irresponsibly in regards to the individual marketplace , destabilizing what was already a shaky infrastructure .
But congressional Democrats are culpable as well , in fact more so than Republicans . The truth is that the individual mandate was too modest to have any major impact . For starters , there were many exemptions — for instance , the hardship provision . Relatedly , Obamacare also allowed adults up to the age of 26 to stay on their parents ’ insurance , thereby giving certain healthy , young people no reason to enroll for themselves . Beyond that , the penalty is incredibly weak , capped at 2.5 percent of income . Finally , payment of the penalty is through the annual tax-filing process , meaning that it is up to the IRS to catch those who simply do not pay it .
Back in 2009 and 2010 , Democrats caught a break from the Congressional Budget Office , which decided that this milquetoast penalty would be sufficient to induce healthy people to purchase a product they did not expect to use . This made Obamacare look good on paper , but in reality everybody knew ( or should have known ) that it was too modest to have much of an impact .
Any time both parties in Congress fail to do something , or do something wrong , we should pay special attention . Anything that afflicts both sides of the aisle suggests an institutional problem with the legislature . And indeed , the bipartisan failure with the mandate is illustrative of an issue I have discussed before , namely that Congress does a terrible job of planning the economy .
Constitutionally speaking , Congress has the requisite authority . When you combine the enumerated powers in Article I , Section 8 , it is pretty clear that it can go about tinkering with most aspects of our economic lives . And indeed , the constitutional issue that the Supreme Court faced in NFIB was due to the fact that congressional Democrats chose , for political purposes , not to call the individual mandate a tax .
However , the Constitution was drafted a generation before the industrialization of the American economy , by founders who never could have anticipated the challenges of modern life . Regulating interstate commerce in 1787 meant arbitrating disputes on shared waterways , not designing a health marketplace . The taxing power was meant to create a foundation for national credit , not for incentivizing people to buy health insurance . Importantly , Congress was designed to handle the problems of 1787 , not 2017 . And for all the ways in which the powers of Congress have been expanded in the ensuring centuries , the design of Congress remains pretty much the same .
The design of Congress has , time and again , proven itself incapable of managing the national economy . There are all sorts of ways that Congress struggles . It is too parochial , inclined to handle national problems according to the local needs of key members of Congress . It is too easily “ bought ” by the wealthy , inclined to deal with policy problems in ways that are amenable to the interests that finance electoral politics and spend lavishly on lobbying . It is too inclined to give out carrots rather than applying sticks . Unless some faction is a tiny or unpopular minority , Congress will hesitate to penalize its behavior , even if that behavior runs contrary to what Congress deems is the national interest . The politics of distributing harms is just too fraught for members who always have their eye on the next election .
This is the main reason why Democrats designed an individual mandate that was manifestly not up to the task of establishing a stable insurance market . It is why Republicans gleefully got rid of it . The mandate was a stick , and Congress hates sticks .
When it comes to guiding the economic behavior of 330 million Americans , sticks are often quite necessary . Sometimes , when you are trying to plan a national economy , it is not enough to incentivize people to do the “ right ” thing . Sometimes you have to punish people for doing the “ wrong ” thing . But unless the people in question are politically unsympathetic ( e.g . polluters ) , Congress will struggle to dole out penalties . One side effect of this problem is cost overruns , as is the case with Medicare , a $ 670 billion program with shocking little oversight over the medical-services industry . And in some cases , like with Obamacare ’ s individual mandate , the result is a full-blown policy failure .
This is why , all else being equal , I am an opponent of federal efforts to reshape any aspect of our economy be they from the right ( e.g . Paul Ryan ’ s plan to redesign Medicare ) or the left ( e.g . Obamacare ) . Experience has proven , again and again , that Congress is simply not up to the task of achieving such grand ambitions in an efficient , or sometimes even an effective , way .