In a lot of ways , being president of the United States is pretty cool . You get your own plane , a mansion , and an enormous household staff . Your motorcade doesn ’ t have to stop at red lights . And when you retire , you can command more money just giving speeches than you ’ ll ever need .
But there are times when it ’ s not hard to imagine the president saying , “ Take this job ... ”
Consider the fiasco known as the rollout of HealthCare.gov . The Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) is the signature initiative of Barack Obama ’ s presidency . It ’ s his baby . And at the moment of truth – the Oct. 1 launch of the website that serves as the portal to the ACA ’ s new insurance market – it crashed upon takeoff . Even now , the prospects for smooth functioning by Nov. 30 , as promised by top officials , aren ’ t looking good .
Then there ’ s that promise Mr. Obama kept making over and over again – that under his health-insurance reform , “ if you like your plan , you can keep it. ” Except , oops , that turned out not to be true for the more than 3 million Americans who have received cancellation notices .
At his press conference Thursday , in which Obama announced a major concession – insurers can offer people their old plans for another year – he also offered a window into the frustrations he has experienced over the past few weeks .
Perhaps nothing can compare with the embarrassment that Obama surely felt when HealthCare.gov made its ignominious debut , leading to questions about what he knew beforehand and when he knew it . News reports have indicated that high-level White House people were given a heads-up in mid-September that the site had problems .
When asked , Obama said he “ was not informed directly ” that the site would not be working as it was supposed to .
“ You know , I 'm accused of a lot of things , ” Obama told reporters . “ But I do n't think I 'm stupid enough to go around saying , this is going to be like shopping on Amazon or Travelocity , a week before the website opens , if I thought that it was n't going to work . ”
Even a week after the launch , he said , “ the thinking was that these were some glitches that would be fixed with patches , ” instead of the broader systemic problems that were found . Those have taken much longer to fix and are still being worked on .
On the “ keep your plan ” promise , Obama ’ s confessional moment continued Thursday , as he turned “ we ” into “ I . ”
“ You have an individual market that accounts for about 5 percent of the population , ” he said . “ And our working assumption was – my working assumption was – that the majority of those folks would find better policies at lower cost or the same cost in the marketplaces . ”
For those who might not find a better deal in the marketplaces , he continued , the idea was that the “ grandfather clause ” – the provision of the law that allowed plans in place before the ACA passed to continue – would work “ sufficiently. ” But it didn ’ t .
“ And again , that ’ s on us , ” Obama said , “ which is why we ’ re – that ’ s on me . ”
“ And that 's why I 'm trying to fix it , ” he continued . “ And as I said earlier ... that 's something I deeply regret , because it 's scary getting a cancellation notice . ”
It was a “ feel your pain ” moment reminiscent of former President Clinton , who , as it happened , helped to back Obama into the corner he was trying to get out of . Two days ago , the news website Ozy released an interview with Mr. Clinton , in which he said Obama should keep his promise and make sure Americans can keep their health plans if they want to .
Obama also felt the pain of fellow Democrats , some of whom face a tough reelection battle next year .
“ There is no doubt that our failure to roll out the ACA smoothly has put a burden on Democrats , whether they 're running or not , because they stood up and supported this effort through thick and thin , ” he said .
“ And I feel deeply responsible for making it harder for them rather than easier for them to continue to promote the core values that I think led them to support this thing in the first place . ”
While he was letting it all out , Obama also went after the federal procurement system for technology , an arcane area of government that has come in for heavy blame amid HealthCare.gov ’ s woes .
“ How we purchase technology in the federal government is cumbersome , complicated , and outdated , ” he said .
Unlike in his successful presidential campaigns , where he could gather top technology minds with relative ease , it doesn ’ t work that way once you ’ re the head of the executive branch .
“ If you 're doing it at the federal government level , you 're going through 40 pages of specs and this and that and the other , and there are all kinds of laws involved , and it makes it more difficult , ” Obama said . “ It 's part of the reason why , chronically , federal IT programs are over budget , behind schedule . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
The president looked ahead to the “ Monday morning quarterbacking ” he would do on himself over HealthCare.gov , suggesting that he should have seen the problems coming .
“ Two years ago , as we were thinking about this , we might have done more to make sure that we were breaking the mold on how we were going to be setting this up , ” Obama said . “ But that does n't help us now . We 've got to move forward . ”