Saturday marks ObamaCare ’ s third anniversary , and President Obama and Democrats across the country will surely celebrate its greatest achievement to date : survival . The health care law narrowly survived a Supreme Court challenge , repeated attempts by House Republicans to repeal it and , with President Obama ’ s reelection , seems to be set for implementation next year .
But survival is a pretty low bar for the law , and far from the lofty claims made on its behalf .
In 2009 , President Obama said that “ it ’ s important for us to make sure that 46 million people who don ’ t have health insurance get it . And I think it ’ s important for us to bend the curve , separate and apart from coverage issues , just because the system we have right now is unsustainable and hugely inefficient and uncompetitive . ”
The Obama administration ’ s claim that the law would rein in spending undoubtedly persuaded wavering Congressional Democrats to push it across the finish line .
In a new report from the Manhattan Institute , Rhetoric and Reality , my colleague Yevgeniy Feyman and I try to summarize the best evidence to date on the impact that the law is having on health care costs today – and whether or not it is likely to contain costs in the future .
Based on the best currently available data , we project that ObamaCare will increase , not decrease , U.S. health care spending .
Certainly , the near term trends aren ’ t favorable for the law . Since the passage of the law , household premiums for private insurance have increased by 11.3 percent , outpacing even the growth of medical inflation ( 6.8 percent ) . Last year , Congressional analysts also projected that employer-based family coverage will cost $ 20,000 by 2016 , an increase of 27 percent over 2012 rates . Looking a little further ahead , premiums are expected to rise steadily through 2021 , except for a brief dip in 2014 .
( The “ dip ” kicks in when ObamaCare ’ s exchange subsidies begin , transferring costs from individuals and families to taxpayers . But shifting costs is not the same thing as containing costs . )
In fact , a recent survey of insurance companies by the American Action Forum , a think tank , found that market reforms included in ObamaCare will spike health insurance premiums , particularly for younger and healthier people . ObamaCare requires insurers to sell richer benefit packages , but the main cost increases come from new rules like rating bands , that limit the discounts insurers can offer to younger policyholders compared to older ones , and prohibit premium variations based on gender and health status .
ObamaCare also includes new taxes on everything from insurance companies to prescription drugs , costs likely to be passed along to families and small businesses shopping for coverage .
ObamaCare didn ’ t invent America ’ s health care woes , and shouldn ’ t be blamed for the ones we already have . The U.S. already spends over $ 2 trillion on health care , approaching 18 percent of U.S. GDP . And health care costs were rising much faster than income or GDP growth for decades before ObamaCare came along .
But the point of the law was to fix the system – not add to its burdens . The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) predicts that the law will add about $ 500 billion to U.S. spending between 2012 and 2021 .
To be fair , ObamaCare does contain several small pilot projects , all of them well meaning , designed to reform the supply or delivery of health care . But existing pilot programs thus far have had mixed or disappointing results . And some projects , like the widespread implementation of electronic health records , seem to have increased costs in some cases , by making it easier for providers to bill for additional services .
Other experiments , like Medicare ’ s Accountable Care Organization ( ACO ) program , may also be cost increasing , by encouraging hospital consolidation that allows them to increase prices .
One area where ObamaCare devotes far too little attention is reforming the demand for health care services . For all of our talk about the crushing cost of American health care , on average , consumers only spend about 11 cents out of pocket for health care – the fifth lowest average among OECD countries . And research suggests that when out of pocket spending is lower , health care spending increases because consumers are only paying a tiny fraction of the total bill .
By 2021 , ObamaCare will push U.S. out of pocket spending even lower than it is today , to just over 9 percent . This may accelerate price increases by insulating the newly insured largely from the costs of the care they consume .
Defenders of the law like to point out that CBO scores the law as reducing the deficit . But this is only because the law brings in more revenues ( through taxes and penalties ) than it spends over a ten year period . And recently , health care cost growth has slowed somewhat . But there is no reason to attribute the slowdown to ObamaCare , since its main provisions haven ’ t even kicked in . And lower Medicare spending is largely ( 75 percent ) attributable to lower drug spending in Medicare ’ s Part D benefit , which started in 2006 .
On net , we found evidence that ObamaCare will do very little to slow U.S. health care spending , and may actually increase it .
While the Congressional debate has focused on repealing ObamaCare , a more politically palatable option may be reforming it by focusing on demand side reforms – like moving most non-poor Americans into higher deductible health plans paired with savings accounts and lowering subsidies on the exchanges ( currently subsidies extend to families making up to $ 94,000 annually ) to focus on low-income families , and building effective systems that allow consumers to easily compare the price and quality of health care options .
An anniversary is supposed to be the time for celebration . For ObamaCare , its third anniversary signifies how little the law has accomplished , and the enormous health care challenges still facing the country .