Obama says he feels responsible for making it hard for Democrats to promote the ACA . Obama to Dems : Stay with me
President Barack Obama admitted Thursday to the American people that he “ fumbled the ball ” in implementing the heart of the Affordable Care Act , but his immediate concern is convincing congressional Democrats to give him another chance to prove he can cross the goal line .
The new play : Offer a fix to reverse the cancellation of millions of Americans ’ existing health insurance , blame insurers for the situation , put Republicans on the defensive , and — if he ’ s lucky — unify Democrats around a new policy that might just give them political cover .
Obama blamed himself for the problems , a clear stab at saving the law by drawing attention to his own failings — and preventing a full-scale revolt from Democrats .
“ I am the head of the team . We did fumble the ball on it , ” he said . “ What I ’ m going to do is make sure we get it fixed . ”
The president said he understood why Democrats who backed the Affordable Care Act at tremendous political peril were so unhappy and asked them to stick with him . The administrative fix is designed in part to keep his fellow Democrats on board .
( IN 90 SECONDS : Obamacare puts Democrats ’ credibility on the line )
“ I feel deeply responsible for making it harder for them rather than easier for them to continue to promote the core values that I think led them to support this thing in the first place , ” Obama said Thursday at a White House press conference .
Obama might be so toxic on Obamacare that fellow Democrats reject his plan — or that enough of him do to make him look ineffectual . Since October 1 , tracking the rollout of the health care law , Americans ’ trust for Obama has dropped 10 percentage points , from 54 percent to an below-the-waterline 44 percent , according to surveys taken by Quinnipiac University .
Over the longer term , Democrats fear that they will get hammered at the polls in the 2014 mid-term elections because of the failure of the website at the heart of the federal insurance exchanges and public dissatisfaction with Obama ’ s handling of policy cancellations — including the fallout of his famed claim that if people like their health care plan , they could keep it .
That could cost Democrats seats in the House and , in the worst-case scenario for Obama , allow Republicans to win control of both chambers of Congress for the final two years of his presidency .
Sen. Mary Landrieu ( D-La . ) , the author of legislation to address the cancellation issue , said Thursday that the administrative fix Obama offered isn ’ t enough for her . While she said she was “ encouraged ” by Obama ’ s proposal , Landrieu , who is facing one of the toughest re-election fights in the country , noted that she would continue to push for her bill .
“ I will be working today and throughout the weeks ahead to support legislation to keep the promise , ” she said .
Behind closed doors , House and Senate Democrats have pounded administration officials over the twin Obamacare troubles and the refusal of the White House , until today , to own up to playing down their effects for several weeks even as the American people could see for themselves that the website wasn ’ t working and that plans were being canceled .