Washington ( CNN ) - A majority of Americans still oppose the nation 's new health care measure , three years after it became law , according to a new survey .
But a CNN/ORC International poll released Monday also indicates that more than a quarter of those who oppose the law , known by many as Obamacare , say they do n't support the measure because it does n't go far enough .
According to the poll , 43 % of the public says it supports the health care law , a figure that 's mostly unchanged in CNN polling since the measure was passed in 2010 by a Congress then controlled by Democrats and signed into law by President Barack Obama . Fifty-four percent of those questioned say they oppose the law , also relatively unchanged since 2010 .
The survey indicates that 35 % oppose the health care law because it 's too liberal , with 16 % saying they oppose the measure because it is n't liberal enough .
The wide partisan divide over the law remains . Nearly three quarters of Democrats say they favor the Affordable Care Act . That number drops to 16 % among Republicans .
`` Not surprisingly , the Obama coalition is most supportive of Obamacare , '' says CNN Polling Director Keating Holland . `` A majority of younger Americans favor the new health care law ; support among other age groups falls as low as 31 % among senior citizens . Only a third of whites support the law , compared to six in 10 non-whites . Obamacare also wins majority support in urban areas and in the Northeast , the bluest region of the country . ''
The CNN poll was conducted May 17-18 , right after the GOP-controlled House voted along party lines to repeal the entire law , the third time House Republicans have voted to overturn the measure over the past three years . As with the previous attempts , the bill is expected to die in the Democrat-controlled Senate .
The survey was conducted by ORC International , with 923 adults nationwide questioned by telephone . The poll 's overall sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points .