Sen. John McCain John Sidney McCainCindy McCain : I can see Arizona 'going Democrat ' in 2020 Ukraine scandal shows that foreign influence is a bipartisan affair America 's newest comedy troupe : House GOP MORE ( R-Ariz. ) returned to the Senate on Tuesday , urging his colleagues to work together and `` trust each other '' during his first floor speech since being diagnosed with brain cancer .
“ Let ’ s trust each other . Let ’ s return to regular order . We ’ ve been spinning our wheels on too many important issues because we keep trying to find a way to win without help from across the aisle , '' McCain said from the Senate floor .
McCain 's speech came after a contentious vote to start debate on repealing and replacing ObamaCare . Democrats remained seated and forced Republicans to put up the 50 votes to proceed to the legislation before they started voting . Vice President Pence ultimately cast the tie-breaking vote .
McCain voted yes on proceeding to the bill , but he said he would oppose the legislation in its current form when it comes time for final passage .
Instead , he urged leadership to throw its weight behind crafting a bipartisan healthcare bill , despite intense pressure from the White House for GOP senators to go it alone and fulfill their yearslong campaign pledge of repealing ObamaCare .
`` Why don ’ t we try the old way of legislating in the Senate , the way our rules and customs encourage us to act ? If this process ends in failure , which seem likely , then let ’ s return to regular order , '' McCain said .
He called the current proposal a `` shell of a bill '' and said the Senate Health Committee should hold hearings on healthcare legislation .
His remarks came as President Trump and the White House stepped up pressure this week on GOP senators , pushing them to agree to at least start the healthcare debate .
Saying he had `` pen in hand , '' Trump tweeted on Tuesday morning that `` after 7 years of talking , we will soon see whether or not Republicans are willing to step up to the plate ! ''
Health and Human Services Secretary Tom Price stood on the side of the Senate chamber as members voted on Tuesday afternoon .
McCain appeared to implicitly counter Trump 's advice for Republicans to go it alone in his floor speech , when he said the current strategy did n't appear to be working .
“ We ’ ve tried to do this by coming up with a proposal behind closed doors in consultation with the administration ... asking us to swallow our doubts and force it past a unified opposition . I don ’ t think that is going to work in the end . And it probably shouldn ’ t , '' he said .
Instead of agreeing on a new healthcare policy , McCain said Republicans have `` managed to ... make more popular a policy that wasn ’ t very popular when we started trying to get rid of it . ''
McCain 's speech is a significant break from the positions of leadership and Trump and is the latest example of the 80-year-old Arizona senator emerging as a chief critic of the president from within the Senate Republican Conference .
He routinely clashes with the administration on foreign policy and has criticized Trump for not coming out with new policies for Afghanistan . He also cast a surprise vote earlier this year to kill a Trump-favored resolution that would have overturned an Obama-era rule on methane emissions .
McCain 's office announced last week that he had been diagnosed with brain cancer , which was discovered following surgery to remove a blood clot from above his left eye . McCain noted from the floor that he would be in the Senate `` for a few days '' before leaving for treatment .
`` I ’ m going home for a while to treat my illness . I have every intention of returning here and giving many of you cause to regret all the nice things you said about me . And I hope to impress on you again that it is an honor to serve the American people in your company , '' he said .
Though senators agreed to move to the House bill , Republicans are still looking at several courses on healthcare reform , including full repeal of ObamaCare , a far narrower repeal and trying to repeal and replace at the same time .