* * Always wanted Fox ’ s political must-reads ? Now you can have them . Each weekday morning , our DC team , led by Chris Stirewalt , delivers the ███ FIRST political newsletter . Sign up here * *
• A parrot , a glass eye and a prosthetic leg
EMPLOYERS SLASHING COVERAGE - UVA dumps spouses - The University of Virginia announced Wednesday it will stop offering health insurance to some employees ’ spouses citing rising costs under ObamaCare . According to a press release on the university ’ s website , “ Provisions of the federal Affordable Care Act are projected to add $ 7.3 million to the cost of the University health plan in 2014 alone. ” This follows news that UPS would be dumping an estimated 15,000 from the company ’ s plan . Chief National Correspondent Jim Angle follows the story today .
[ A new study from consultants Towers Watson says 40 percent of businesses surveyed plan to change their health plans next year in light of the law . ]
Nevada union trashes ObamaCare - Nevada ’ s AFL-CIO passed a resolution Wednesday saying ObamaCare would , “ lead to the destruction of the 40 hour work week , higher taxes and force union members onto more costly plans ”
[ FNC ’ s William LaJeunesse reports on the ObamaCare provision that exempts some 6 million American Indians from penalties under the law . ]
OBAMA TURNS COLLEGE RECRUITER - Ed Henry wants to know : “ The White House says the bus tour through universities and high schools is focused on college affordability . But since a new Gallup poll found young adults are least likely to say they 're familiar with the health law , will he also use this swing to rally his campaign base ahead of the Oct. 1 sign up deadline ? ”
Welcome to Buffalo , Mr. President - President Obama travels to Buffalo today , part of a two-day economic bus tour that will take him thru upstate New York and Pennsylvania . At the University of Buffalo , Obama will pitch his “ better bargain for the middle class ” with a call for more education spending . In an e-mail to supporters , the President wrote , “ We have to fundamentally rethink about how higher education is paid for in this country . ”
Tuition spike - The Albany Times Union reports Gov . Andrew Cuomo , D-N.Y. , scheduled to appear with the president , “ …created the NYSUNY 2020 program , which raised tuition 30 percent at all SUNY campuses over five years , from $ 4,970 to $ 6,470. ” According to US News and World Report , 63 percent of Buffalo University students receive some kind of need-based assistance .
Teacher union angst - The Buffalo Teacher ’ s Federation is fuming that their teacher ’ s make $ 20,000 less than their counterparts in other districts . Buffalo News reports , in some cases , $ 45,000 less . Census figures reveal the city ’ s 29.9 percent poverty rate .
Local schools losing ground - The president will wrap-up the day speaking at Henninger High School in Syracuse . Obama will be joined by Education Secretary Arne Duncan to tout the school ’ s involvement with a government program that pays the tuition for students at failing schools accepted at public colleges and participating private institutions . According to New York ’ s Department of Education , graduation rates in the city stand at 48 % .
[ Daniel Henninger , ( no relation ) writes : “ The president gives essentially the same speech everywhere . In part it is a meditation on the meaning of middle class— ‘ Americans are gritty , resilient and work hard. ’ In part it is populist paranoia . ” ]
Bad to worse - The Syracuse Post Standard reports students in the district are failing to meet the state ’ s new curriculum standards . “ [ O ] nly 8.7 percent of third- through eighth-graders met the standard in English language arts . In math , only 6.9 percent of students met the standard . ”
BAIER TRACKS : FED FLUSTER… Bret Baier : “ If anyone needs more evidence of the supercharged role of the Federal Reserve in the economy , here 's another piece . Just the mere hint of different analyses of the minutes of the central bank 's July meeting released yesterday sent stocks lower . That 's essentially someone in analysis circles whispering , ‘ You know , it looks like the Fed may really start turning off the spigot soon. ’ Well , imagine what happens when the Fed does slow or stop the flood of new US dollars into the economy . Bottom line : Fed policy is a huge economic driver . At his last news conference , President Obama said picking a new Fed chairman , ‘ is definitely one of the most important economic decisions that I ’ ll make in the remainder of my presidency. ’ Many experts characterize that as a big understatement . ”
GALLUP : UNEMPLOYMENT ’ S 30 DAY JUMP - Gallup ’ s latest unemployment figures show a significant jump from July ’ s 7.7 percent to 8.9 percent released Wednesday . Their figures also show underemployment increased from 17.1 percent to 17.9 percent in the same 30-day period .
Still stuck - NYT reports median income remains below 2007 levels .
[ Watch FOX Business for the Bureau of Labor Statistics ’ jobless claims report in the 8am ET hour . ]
NSA HAD EYES ON US COMMUNICATION - Washington Examiner reports the NSA gathered over 56,000 “ wholly domestic ” communications before a secret court struck the program down . The revelation comes in 100 pages of documents declassified by the agency . Most are secret opinions from the FISA court ; they detail major compliance problems . The NSA worked with Congress and the FISA court to correct the problem but ultimately decided it could not salvage the data collected and it was purged in 2012 . Chief Intelligence Correspondent Catherine Herridge is taking a deep dive on the documents . To read them yourself , click here .
[ Watch FOX : Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner , R-Wis. , who helped write the Patriot Act discusses how he feels President Obama has abused the law in 12pm ET hour . ]
GRENELL : POWER A NO SHOW ON SYRIA - Newly confirmed UN Ambassador Samantha Power was absent from an emergency meeting of the Security Council Wednesday on a chemical weapons attack that killed hundreds . Power , who has previously called the UN ’ s failure to intervene in Syria “ a disgrace , ” was reportedly traveling at the time of the meeting . ███ Contributor Richard Grenell , a former member of George W. Bush ’ s UN team , wants to know where she was : “ Samantha Power has been on the job exactly 19 days . In that time , she ’ s already traveled from New York to Los Angeles to deliver a speech . Her absence from the UN on Wednesday sends a terrible message at a time when U.S. credibility in the region is suffering . ”
WITH YOUR SECOND CUP OF COFFEE ... Washington Examiner ’ s Michael Barone explains the hidden agendas behind the preservation of the dollar bill . [ Hint : It ’ s all about the money… ] “ No other advanced country , so far as I am aware , uses a bill for amounts approximating a dollar . They use coins , which are longer lasting and more convenient to use in vending machines and parking meters . Coins last longer and don ’ t bulge up in your wallet . ”
Obama Job Approval : Approve – 44.5 percent//Disapprove – 50.5 percent
Direction of Country : Right Direction – 29.6 percent Right Track//Wrong Track – 62.2 percent
HILLARYLAND - “ Vulture capitalist ” cash for Hillary - Politico : “ Hillary Clinton is set to be the featured attraction at the private equity firm The Carlyle Group ’ s investor conference next month. ” Carlyle is the same kind of firm that the 2012 Obama campaign lambasted Mitt Romney for running , famously calling Romney a “ vampire . ”
Dean backs Hillary “ at this point ” - In brief interview with the Des Moines Register , former Vermont Gov . Howard Dean said , “ At this point , I ’ m supporting Hillary Clinton. ” Dean cut the interview short when asked about his presidential aspirations .
VOTER ID “ OATH ” FIGHT - Kansas and Arizona fight feds on voting - ███ : Kansas and Arizona say a federal rule that allows voters to establish their status as citizens by simply swearing an oath won ’ t keep elections safe . They ’ re suing to overturn the rule .
HOUSE WANTS ANSWERS ON ASYLUM ABUSES - Washington Examiner : “ In a letter to Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano , Rep. Bob Goodlatte , R-Va. , warned that foreigners , particularly from Mexico , are exploiting a law that allows those with a ‘ credible fear ’ of persecution in their own country to enter the U.S. …Goodlatte intends to hold hearings to investigate the issue and called on Homeland Security personnel to testify ”
OFF TO THE RACES - Brown : No gov run , still pondering president and senate bids - Former Sen. Scott Brown , R-Mass. , announced on WBZ Wednesday that he will not run for Massachusetts ’ governor . Brown : “ From the most conservative to the most liberal Republican : if we are going to be an effective party we have to all have a voice . ”
CHRISTIAN RESCUE MISSION - ███ - An international relief agency plans to airlift some 3,400 Christians out of Sudan , where they face increasing persecution from the Islamist government . The Barnabas Fund , named for St. Paul ’ s ministry partner , has already rescued about 5,000 Christians from the embattled country . The Christians will be taken to South Sudan , a smaller nation formed in 2011 where religious freedom is better tolerated .
PLEASE REMOVE ALL PERSONAL ITEMS - NY POST : “ What do handcuffs , a live parrot , bag of diamonds and underwear have in common ? They 're all items that have been left on planes , much to the surprise of flight attendants . That 's according to a survey of cabin crew by travel website Skyscanner.com….Other weird items discovered on board long after passengers departed include dentures , a bag of sand , a glass eye and prosthetic leg . ”
AND NOW , A WORD FROM CHARLES - “ In Egypt where there are only two sides -- there 's only the Brotherhood and only the military -- with wide popular support . We 're not choosing either . And I think the administration 's incoherence on policy is astounding ” – Charles Krauthammer on “ Special Report with Bret Baier . ”
Chris Stirewalt is digital politics editor for ███ . Want ███ First in your inbox every day ? Sign up here . To catch Chris live online daily at 11:30am ET , click here .