President Barack Obama tried to beat back criticism of the Affordable Care Act Monday , assuring supporters that those who want coverage will get it and that people who are losing their insurance will end up with better health-care plans .
After facing a month ’ s worth of complaints about the botched rollout of HealthCare.gov , Mr. Obama found a friendlier crowd in Washington as he appeared at an “ Obamacare summit , ” held by Organizing for Action , the advocacy group that supports the White House ’ s agenda .
In recent days , Mr. Obama has come under fire for his repeated assurances that “ if you like your plan , you can keep your plan. ” Now , thousands of Americans who buy insurance on the individual market are receiving notice that their coverage has been cancelled , a development that has angered consumers and energized Republican opponents of the health-care law .
The president began to recalibrate his promise last week , and on Monday , he offered another take , telling people who like their plan that “ what we said was : You could keep it if it hasn ’ t changed since the law passed . ”
Mr. Obama said some Americans will now pay more for better coverage , and all new plans will meet the minimum requirements laid out in the law .
“ The bottom line is we are making the insurance market better for everybody , ” he said . The president added that there has always been churn in the individual market , saying that critics were portraying this as a new phenomenon .
Nearly five weeks after the debut of the online insurance marketplaces , the website is still beset with technical issues , and Monday brought another “ unscheduled outage. ” Mr. Obama said he was unhappy about the persistent problems , and he pushed people to try to apply for coverage by phone or mail .
“ There was a time when the Internet didn ’ t exist , ” he said . “ It wasn ’ t that long ago . ”
Later , at a second OFA event , Mr. Obama described the problems with HealthCare.gov as inexcusable and said that once the website is fixed , more should be done to examine federal procurement procedures for information technology projects .
For now , the aim is to make HealthCare.gov functional by the end of the month . Mr. Obama said that only one month has expired in a six-month enrollment period .
“ It ’ s not as if there ’ s a one-day sale or something , ” he said .