At the debate , as throughout the campaign , Warren refused to provide any specifics about how she would fund a single-payer plan . Instead , whether questioned by moderators or challenged by other candidates , she recycled variants on the same talking points she has used in venues from campaign town halls to a recent appearance on The Late Show With Stephen Colbert . Rather than explaining what revenue she would raise to fund the plan , Warren insisted that under single payer , middle-income families would save more money with the elimination of health-care premiums , co-pays , and deductibles , regardless of any taxes imposed . “ Costs will go up for the wealthy and for big corporations , and for hard-working middle-class families , costs will go down , ” she said at the debate .
That calculation itself is disputed . And it begs the question : Even if families would eventually save under a single-payer system , a President Warren would still need to identify a politically plausible funding plan to pass such a program through Congress . By all indications , that looms as an extremely daunting project .
The new Urban Institute study helps define the magnitude of the task Warren ( or Sanders ) would face . The think tank modeled the costs of eight possible plans to expand health-care coverage that generally track ideas from the Democratic presidential candidates . By far , the most expensive was its version of the single-payer plan that Sanders introduced in the Senate and that Warren later endorsed : a blueprint that would eliminate private health insurance , require no co-pays or premiums from individuals , and provide everyone in the United States ( including undocumented immigrants ) an expansive benefits package including dental , vision , and home health care .
The 10-year cost of $ 34 trillion that the study forecasts nearly matches the CBO ’ s estimate of how much money the federal government will spend over that period not only on all entitlement programs , but also on all federal income support , such as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program . Former Vice President Joe Biden said incorrectly at the debate that the single-payer plan would cost more annually than the total existing federal budget—it would cost less . ( The CBO says Washington will spend about $ 4.6 trillion in 2020 . ) But over the next decade , the plan on its own would represent a nearly 60 percent increase in total expected federal spending , from national defense to interest on the national debt , according to CBO projections .
The Urban Institute estimates that a single-payer plan would require $ 32 trillion in new tax revenue over the coming decade . That ’ s slightly less revenue than its projected cost , because it would generate some offsetting savings by eliminating certain tax benefits the government now provides , such as the exclusion for employer-provided health care .