A full ACA recovery is possible , if the federal enrollment site stops having breakdowns . | REUTERS The limits of the wayback machine
The new Democratic talking point about Obamacare is full of optimism : After all , the launch of the Medicare prescription drug program was bumpy , too , but now the program is considered a huge success .
It ’ s true , and there are parallels between the two rollouts — but that doesn ’ t guarantee that Obamacare will be vindicated in the same way , health care experts say .
It just means that President Barack Obama ’ s signature health care law shouldn ’ t be written off just yet . Everything depends on what happens in the next few months . A full recovery is possible , if the federal enrollment website stops having comical breakdowns within the next month and the rest of the implementation runs more smoothly .
If that doesn ’ t happen , none of the lessons of Medicare Part D ’ s rollout will be able to save Obamacare .
( Understanding Obamacare : ███ 's guide to the Affordable Care Act )
“ If it gets fixed , six months from now it will be remembered as a rocky episode and nothing more , ” said Mike Leavitt , who presided over the Medicare Part D launch as President George W. Bush ’ s Health and Human Services secretary . But if the HealthCare.gov website is still failing by then , Leavitt said , “ it will brand Obamacare in a very harsh light . ”
Lately , House Democrats have been using the wayback machine to remind the public that the early weeks of the Medicare prescription drug program in late 2005 and early 2006 were pretty disastrous , too . Rep. Henry Waxman of California , ranking member on the House Energy and Commerce Committee , released a memo that recounted a host of problems , from a glitchy website of its own to overloaded call centers and seniors who couldn ’ t get their prescriptions filled .
It ’ s the Democratic counterpoint to the series of hearings House Republicans are holding on the klutzy start of Obamacare enrollment , which will continue with Tuesday ’ s questioning of Marilyn Tavenner , the head of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services , and will peak with Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius ’ s testimony on Wednesday .
At the committee ’ s hearing with Obamacare contractors last week , other Democrats suggested that the chaos of the Medicare Part D launch was a distant memory because the problems got fixed . They say that ’ s partly because Democrats , who were highly critical of the GOP-designed program , worked with Republicans to support those repairs , rather than just bashing the law the way Republicans have done with Obamacare .
“ Did Democrats get up and say , ‘ Oh , Medicare Part D doesn ’ t work , let ’ s repeal it ? ’ No , ” Rep. Frank Pallone of New Jersey said at the hearing . Over time , Pallone said , “ the glitches disappeared and it became a good program . ”
Health care experts who have followed the beginnings of both programs say Medicare Part D did have a similar kind of nerve-wracking , wheels-coming-off feel when it launched . So why is Obamacare ’ s rollout getting so much more attention ? Partly because the repeal of the health care law “ has become a rallying cry for half the Congress , ” said Dan Mendelson , CEO of Avalere Health and a former Office of Management and Budget health adviser in the Clinton administration .
But the Obama administration also set the bar high for itself by promising a website that would make shopping for health insurance as easy as buying airline tickets or flat-screen TVs online , Mendelson said .
“ They set very high expectations , which they did not meet . There ’ s no question about it , ” Mendelson said .
There certainly were some similarities . Just like Obamacare , Medicare Part D had a six-month open enrollment period to allow seniors to sign up for the first time , too . It ran from Nov. 15 , 2005 , through May 15 , 2006 . And the first few months were terrible , terrible months .
One reason : The Medicare Plan Finder website , which was supposed to help seniors compare prescription drug plans , was overloaded and worked slowly , when it worked at all .
Mark McClellan , who ran CMS when the new Medicare benefit was unveiled , recalls one key difference between then and now : The Part D website had a “ soft launch ” in which seniors could browse for drug plans for a few weeks before they could sign up . That allowed some time to look for glitches , he said .
But that still doesn ’ t mean the website ran smoothly when enrollment began . Mendelson recently tweeted a link to a 2005 C-SPAN program in which a top Medicare official tried to give a live demonstration of the website . The message that came up on the screen : “ Page Temporarily Unavailable . ”
“ It was the same kind of thing . People were trying to get on , and they couldn ’ t get on , ” recalls Jack Hoadley , a health policy analyst at Georgetown University who followed the launch closely . “ It gradually improved , ” he said , but the website “ only got to be up to an optimal level of performance in Year Two or Year Three . ”