Vice President Joseph R. Biden vowed Monday that Obamacare eventually will be a success , but added a crucial qualifier : “ God willing . ”
Mr. Biden , widely rumored to be mulling his own White House run in 2016 , has good reason to call for divine intervention in turning around what has been a disastrous rollout of the Affordable Care Act . His political ambitions will be tied directly to the law he once called a “ big [ expletive ] deal ” : Its success would give the vice president a key selling point ; its failure would weigh down and possibly sink his campaign .
Mr. Biden isn ’ t the only Democratic presidential hopeful saddled with the politically delicate task of figuring out how to handle Obamacare ’ s rocky start .
Governors such as New York ’ s Andrew Cuomo and Maryland ’ s Martin O ’ Malley , thought to be considering presidential bids , have not decided whether they will embrace the president ’ s “ fix ” — a one-year reprieve for Americans whose insurance policies are being canceled .
Sen. Elizabeth Warren , Massachusetts Democrat and a favorite among liberals who are urging her to run in 2016 , recently came out in support of the president ’ s fix . But she also is backing the Obamacare feature that is causing the cancellations and/or requiring people in the individual insurance market to pay more for policies — regulations that require insurance plans to meet certain coverage and generosity standards established by the federal government .
The 2016 Democratic favorite , Hillary Rodham Clinton , largely has been mum on the health care law , but her husband has thrust her into the issue by calling on Mr. Obama to keep his promise and allow Americans to keep their insurance if they like it .
SEE ALSO : White House , ‘ despite assurances , ’ knew of Obamacare glitches in spring
Former President Bill Clinton ’ s words came at an inopportune time for Mr. Obama , who last week had to address the nation and acknowledge that his infamous “ if you like your plan , you can keep your plan ” pledge wasn ’ t true .
For the Clintons , Mr. Obama ’ s success in pushing through health care reform , despite its many problems , also is a reminder of their own failure in the early 1990s . The Clintons ’ reform effort , dubbed Hillarycare , eventually collapsed amid strong opposition from Republicans , the insurance industry and others .
But for Mrs. Clinton and others who may mount a presidential run , analysts say , Obamacare could be in the rear-view mirror by the time party primary debates begin in 2015 , assuming the law ’ s trajectory is turned around — and fast .
If the election were held next year rather than in 2016 , Mr. Biden , Mrs. Clinton , Mr. Cuomo and other candidates would be using the issue to attack one another and explain why they would have handled health care reform better than the current commander in chief , said Dante Scala , a political science professor at the University of New Hampshire who specializes in presidential politics .
“ By 2015 , we ’ ll be a couple of years into this . The overall results of the Affordable Care Act would have to be as horrendous as this rollout has been for it to be an issue , ” he said Monday .
“ Let ’ s assume things get better from here as far as Obamacare goes — and that ’ s a fair question to ask — but assume it goes better from here . I think Democrats , as a whole , will have had their fill of the health care debate . They ’ re going to be interested in saying that it ’ s settled , let ’ s improve it and move on to other things . They ’ re not going to want to relitigate it , ” he said .
But Democrats with presidential ambitions can ’ t keep silent for the next two years in the hopes that Obamacare — and its troubled website , HealthCare.gov — gains traction .
With the exception of Mrs. Clinton , potential contenders must make decisions and take positions now .
In Maryland , Mr. O ’ Malley ’ s administration is weighing whether to adopt the president ’ s fix or buck the administration and allow people to be booted off of their insurance plans .
“ The president ’ s announcement presents a number of complex issues , ” the state ’ s insurance administration said in a statement , adding that Maryland officials will meet with insurance companies and other parties to determine the best path forward .
New York ’ s Department of Financial Services , which oversees health insurance , didn ’ t respond to requests for comment Monday , but officials in the Empire State also reportedly haven ’ t made a decision .
Mrs. Warren — a first-term senator who quickly has become a progressive hero — is standing with the president and has defended the administration ’ s proposed fix .
“ They ’ re trying to make the transition work . They ’ re trying to do everything they can to make it work and get people into the system , ” she said last week after the president announced his proposed changes .
If health care reform does become a major issue in the Democratic primary , it likely would focus more on the management issues related to the website launch and other problems with implementation , rather the underlying goals of Obamacare , on which the potential candidates largely agree .
“ I don ’ t think it ’ ll be a high-profile issue in which the debate moderators are trying to draw clear distinctions between one candidate and another , simply because I don ’ t believe there are clear distinctions to be had , ” Mr. Scala said .