An aggressive push by Tea Party lawmakers to defund ObamaCare is increasingly pitting Republicans against Republicans , as some party leaders and conservative pundits claim the goal is not achievable this year -- and could irresponsibly risk a government shutdown .
Sen. Mike Lee , R-Utah , and his allies in the Senate are trying to round up support for a pledge to oppose any budget bill that funds the health care law . They 're emboldened by the administration 's recent decision to delay a key part of the law , arguing the move shows it 's not ready for prime time .
`` Businesses do n't like it . Individuals hate it . Union leaders say it will be bad for workers , '' Lee said on `` ███ Sunday . '' `` The law is certainly not ready to implement , and we should n't fund it . ''
But the demand , if backed by enough lawmakers , could create an impasse in Washington -- risking the possibility that Congress will miss its Sept. 30 deadline for passing a budget and shutting down the government .
A number of GOP lawmakers have come out against the defund-ObamaCare campaign , claiming that while they 'd like nothing more than to strip the law of its funding , the party does not have the numbers to deliver .
More On This ... Republicans must resist game of chicken with president over ObamaCare
`` I 'd be leading the charge if I thought this would work . But it will not work , '' Sen. Tom Coburn , R-Okla. , told the Washington Examiner .
Coburn did not hold back in criticizing the campaign , accusing fellow Republicans of being `` dishonest '' with their base .
`` It 's not an achievable strategy . It 's creating the false impression that you can do something when you ca n't , '' he said .
Earlier , Sen. Richard Burr , R-N.C. , said in an interview with Public Radio International that the shutdown threat is the `` dumbest idea I 've ever heard . ''
He and others argue that Congress will not be able to defund the health care law as long as Obama is in the White House .
Yet if enough Republicans sign on to the effort , they could prevent the Senate from advancing a budget bill -- in turn threatening the shutdown .
Washington has been down this road before , most recently averting a shutdown this past March . And both sides of the aisle are flirting with a shutdown threat to get their way this year . While some Republicans claim to be holding out for the health care law to be stripped of funding , some liberal Democrats are beginning to insist that sequester spending cuts be changed or undone as a condition for support on a budget bill .
The administration offered words of support for the latter efforts on Sunday , with Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew saying : `` Congress should find a way out of sequester . ''
On the Republican side , a dozen senators -- including Sens . Marco Rubio , R-Fla. ; Ted Cruz , R-Texas ; and Rand Paul , R-Ky. -- have so far backed the push to defund ObamaCare .
They began rounding up support after the administration opted to delay by a year the requirement on some employers to provide health care coverage to workers .
`` If Democrats will not agree with Republicans that ObamaCare must be repealed , perhaps they can at least agree with the president that the law can not be implemented as written , '' they wrote in a letter to Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid . `` If the administration will not enforce the law as written , then the American people should not be forced to fund it . ''