The Republican leaders of the House and Senate announced Thursday that they will boycott the ObamaCare-created committee responsible for holding down Medicare costs , in a challenge to a controversial element of the health care overhaul .
The Individual Payment Advisory Board , or IPAB , has been described as a `` death panel '' by some of its fiercest critics . Though that epithet is not often used anymore to describe the panel , Republicans still say it would hurt seniors by forcing doctors to stop seeing patients .
House Speaker John Boehner and Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell , in a letter Thursday to President Obama , said they would refuse to recommend any nominees to the committee , reiterating that they think it should be repealed entirely .
They revived concerns that the panel would enforce Medicare cuts by reducing payments to providers and/or `` eliminating '' certain treatments .
`` These reduced payments will force providers to stop seeing Medicare patients , the same way an increased number of doctors have stopped taking Medicaid patients . This will lead to access problems , waiting lists and denied care for seniors , '' they wrote .
The 15-member advisory board , known as IPAB , would have the power to force payment cuts on insurers , drug companies and other service providers if Medicare costs rise beyond certain levels .
The health care law explicitly forbids the board from rationing care , shifting costs to seniors or cutting their benefits . But Boehner , at a news conference Thursday , said the members still `` have the authority to deny seniors access to care . ''
It 's unclear what effect the boycott will have on the panel . The law says the president should consult with Congress on the nominations , but the president is free to make his own appointments . The members of the board , though , are supposed to be from both parties and nominees would be subject to Senate confirmation .
White House Press Secretary Jay Carney slammed Republicans for the stance and for renewed efforts to repeal the health care law .
`` It just demonstrates again how out of touch with what the American people want the House Republicans have become . Instead of focusing on measures that could help us invest in innovation and manufacturing and job creation , instead of focusing on common-sense efforts to reduce our deficit in a balanced way , House Republicans are voting again to repeal the Affordable Care Act , '' Carney said .
Asked why the House was voting a 37th time to repeal all or part of the law , even though GOP leaders know the Democratic-controlled Senate will again ignore the vote , Boehner said there were about 70 new members of the House this year . `` Frankly they have been asking for an opportunity to vote on it , and we are going to give it to them . ''
He said he supports total repeal of the law rather than efforts to amend it as it goes into effect over the next year .
Republicans say there have been only two previous votes to eliminate the health care law in its entirety . They say there have been more than 30 votes to partially repeal or defund the law , and several have been signed into law , including one eliminating an unpopular tax-filing requirement that would have affected millions of businesses .
Economists have predicted that the Medicare board 's services might not be needed in the near future because Medicare cost increases appear to be manageable .