Some observers are already raising concerns about a backlash . “ ‘ Medicare for All ’ has become a rallying cry , ” says Nancy Nielsen , who worked at the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation under the Obama administration . “ If a candidate emerges who embraces that policy approach ... the risk is that [ voters ] will simply reelect Donald Trump . ”
Less than a year later , many Democrats seem to be jettisoning that political advantage in favor of a “ repeal and replace ” option of their own . A number of the party ’ s presidential candidates are backing “ Medicare for All , ” a single , government-run insurance system . Over two nights of debates in Detroit this week , candidates clashed over how fully they were willing to embrace single-payer care , making health care policy the primary arena for a larger fight over President Barack Obama ’ s legacy – and the future of the Democratic Party .
In 2018 , Democrats recaptured the majority in the U.S. House of Representatives in large part because of health care . Candidates campaigned on the successes of “ Obamacare , ” vowing to protect people with preexisting medical conditions from Republican efforts to “ repeal and replace ” the law .
Not long ago , the Affordable Care Act was political poison for Democrats .
The health reform measure ’ s rocky rollout in 2010 had forced millions of Americans to switch to more expensive health insurance because their old plans didn ’ t meet the law ’ s requirements . In poll after poll , President Barack Obama ’ s signature act met with broad public disapproval . That fall ’ s midterm elections , which saw the rise of the tea party , were disastrous for Democrats : The party lost six Senate seats and 63 seats in the House of Representatives – as well as control of that chamber .
But by 2018 , things had changed . Republicans under President Donald Trump had repeatedly botched their attempts to “ repeal and replace ” the ACA , as the public ’ s comfort with – and support for – the law grew . Democratic candidates across the nation , and especially in swing districts , began actively campaigning on “ Obamacare. ” They vowed to protect people with preexisting medical conditions , ran ads on the issue , and hammered the point home at town halls .
It worked . In November , Democrats won back the majority in the House .
Yet less than a year later , as the 2020 presidential primaries kick into gear , many Democrats seem to be jettisoning that hard-won political advantage in favor of a “ repeal and replace ” option of their own . Many are converging around the idea of a single , government-run insurance system , “ Medicare for All , ” that promises coverage for everyone , zero out-of-pocket costs , and , over time , lower health care spending overall . In the process , health care policy is becoming the primary arena for a larger fight over President Obama ’ s legacy – and the future direction of the Democratic Party .
Over two nights of debates in Detroit this week , 20 candidates vying for the nomination clashed over how fully they were willing to embrace single-payer care .
On the first night , Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders and Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren , the front-runners from the party ’ s progressive wing , defended their plans to deliver health care from the clutches of greedy insurance companies . Their more moderate rivals accused them of wanting to take away the public ’ s freedom to choose in favor of an idea that would be mind-bogglingly expensive and disruptive ( and , without a filibuster-proof majority in the Senate , would never become law , anyway ) .
On Night Two , former Vice President Joe Biden and California Sen. Kamala Harris attacked each other ’ s health care proposals in a messier version of the previous night ’ s battle that drew their fellow candidates into the fray . Cost became a sticking point for Senator Harris , while Mr. Biden found himself in the position of defending “ Obamacare ” – his plan would build on the law ’ s successes – while distancing himself in other ways from President Obama , now viewed by some in the Democratic base as too centrist for the times .
It was a stark shift from the party ’ s unified front on health care during last year ’ s midterm elections . Protecting those with preexisting conditions , so crucial to Democrats ’ success last November , barely came up . Instead , the candidates tangled over policy ideas far to the left of what the ACA ever set out to achieve , like completely eliminating private insurance .
Some political observers are already raising concerns about yet another health care backlash that could hurt the party ’ s chances against President Trump in 2020 .
“ Medicare for All has become a rallying cry and the litmus test for the candidates , and the party has been pushed way to the left , ” says Nancy Nielsen , who served as a senior adviser at the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services under the Obama administration . “ If a candidate emerges who embraces that policy approach ... the risk is that [ voters ] will simply reelect Donald Trump . ”
It ’ s Tuesday night , and the debate watch party at McShane ’ s Irish Pub in downtown Detroit is in full swing . Patrons whoop at candidates ’ punchy one-liners . Some fill out debate bingo cards handed out by the nonpartisan group Citizen Detroit . The whole place smells like buttered popcorn .
Betty Bartlett , a retired personnel officer for Wayne County , arrived early with Dianne Harrison , a local teacher ’ s aide , to secure a hightop table in the crowded bar . Over sodas ahead of the debate , the two friends agree they haven ’ t decided whom they ’ d like to be the nominee . What they do know is that health care has gotten too expensive .
“ Medicare for All , I think that ’ d be a good thing , ” Ms. Bartlett says . “ I take 4 shots of insulin a day , and it ’ s not cheap . ”
The women ’ s sentiments track with nationwide polling on health care . Just over half of Americans would favor some kind of national Medicare for All – or single-payer – plan , with about 72 % of Democrats supporting it , according to polling from the Kaiser Family Foundation , a health policy research group . Support goes up even more when people are presented with arguments that say such a plan would lower costs and guarantee health care as a right .
But large majorities also don ’ t realize how dramatically most Medicare for All proposals would change the way Americans receive and pay for health care . Public support drops when people learn about tax hikes or the possibility of longer wait periods under a single-payer system .
The same is true for public option proposals , which would create a government-run system to compete with the private health insurance market . About two-thirds of the public broadly say they would favor such a plan , but responses are significantly swayed by arguments around the level of government intervention that would be involved and how it would affect the cost of coverage .
Buzzy slogans also fail to address a host of other questions that could affect people ’ s views ahead of the general election . Like : What would happen to long-term care for people with disabilities , which isn ’ t covered under Medicare ? How will unions , typically a Democratic constituency , feel about giving up the employer-based coverage they have negotiated ? Would a new system have any effect on prescription drug prices ?
Laura Packard , a Democratic digital consultant who became a health care advocate after surviving stage 4 cancer , notes that most of the leading policy proposals wouldn ’ t kick in until 2025 or later . Folks like her would be uninsurable without the protections guaranteed by the ACA .
“ Debates are important , ” says Ms. Packard , who was co-chair of the 2018 Health Care Voter campaign . “ But we can ’ t forget the people who need help right now . ”
“ There are things that people are not talking about yet , that they will in the general , ” adds Dr. Nielsen , who ’ s also the senior associate dean of health policy at the University at Buffalo in New York . Democrats “ could lose the general election when the populace who is going to vote really understands some of the nuances . ”
On Thursday , former Vice President Biden expressed exasperation with his rivals ’ criticisms of “ Obamacare ” – and the president whose name it bears – as insufficiently bold . “ There ’ s nothing moderate about what Barack did in ‘ Obamacare ’ – nothing , ” he asserted . “ No president had come close ” to achieving health care reform before that . “ They tried and they tried and they tried – seven presidents . This guy did an incredible job . ”
So why are so many Democrats seemingly abandoning what had finally become a winning issue for them , in favor of a plan that could once again generate a huge backlash ?
“ Last year , you were talking to general election voters . Now it ’ s the Democratic primary , ” says longtime strategist Kelly Dietrich . “ What matters now is how many Dems you can convince . ”
At this stage in the game , voters are looking for vision , he says , not policy details . Beating President Trump – the top priority for Democrats – means fielding a candidate who can give voters something to believe in and turn out for .
From this perspective , health care – because it ’ s so fundamental – makes sense as a vehicle through which candidates try to make that case . Of course there ’ s the risk of alienating certain voters come November 2020 , Mr. Dietrich and others say . But every presidential nominee takes that risk .
Many candidates said as much on the debate stage in Detroit .
“ It ’ s time to stop worrying about what the Republicans will say , ” argued South Bend , Indiana , Mayor Pete Buttigieg . The GOP will paint the Democratic nominee as a “ crazy socialist ” no matter what positions he or she takes , he added . “ Let ’ s stand up for the right policy , go up there and defend it . ”
Senator Warren made a similar – and similarly well-received – point : “ I don ’ t understand why anybody goes to all the trouble of running for president of the United States just to talk about what we really can ’ t do and shouldn ’ t fight for , ” she said .
Aaron Hanke , a lawyer for Macomb County Circuit Court and a passionate Democrat , says he couldn ’ t agree more . On Wednesday night he and his wife hosted a handful of guests in the basement of their home in Fraser , Michigan , just north of Detroit . During a commercial break , as the young couple ’ s two huskies – Spaghetti and Meatball – scamper around the room sniffing for crumbs , Mr. Hanke explains : “ Politics is the art of the possible . ‘ Obamacare ’ was a compromise – and it ’ s good . It helped people . ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ But we ’ re not done , ” he says . “ ‘ Obamacare ’ is great , but it ’ s not the gold standard . Anyone our age who says it is is betraying our generation . ”
Staff writer Story Hinckley contributed from Detroit and Fraser , Michigan .