The Obamacare employer mandate has been delayed by a year to 2015 , meaning that many businesses can push back providing worker health insurance a bit longer .
When the Affordable Care Act was passed in 2010 , it required that companies with 50-plus full-timers start providing them coverage in 2014 -- or face penalties .
That changed on Tuesday . In a blog post , the U.S. Treasury Department explained that the government needs time to simplify reporting requirements , and businesses need breathing room to adapt to the changes .
`` This provides vital breathing room . I think businesses are relieved there 's more time to get this right , '' said James A. Klein , president of the American Benefits Council , an employer benefits advocacy group .
A relatively small share of the country 's businesses fall under Obamacare 's employer rules , and most of those that do already provide insurance . That might sound surprising , because the biggest Obamacare myth spouted by opponents is that it will crush small business .
The vast majority of the nation 's businesses , 97 % of them , are too small to be affected .
What 's more , most larger employers already provide insurance anyway . Of the nation 's 6.5 million workplaces , only about 70,000 -- a little more than 1 % -- must actually start providing insurance .
The mandate affects most of the nation 's workers . According to the latest Census data , close to 80 million people work at firms that must provide insurance . Though most of them are offered insurance , that still leaves millions who will have to wait another year .
It has impacted those businesses that intend to dodge Obamacare by cutting worker hours . The employer mandate kicks in at 50 full-timers , and the law counts anyone who works at least 30 hours a week as full-time .
That 's given rise to the `` 29ers '' phenomenon , in which business owners reduce workers ' hours from full-time to 29 hours per week . This has been especially prevalent in the franchising and restaurant industries , where shift hours are frequently swapped .
There 's no telling whether the mandate has already impacted hiring , though . Mark Zandi , chief economist at Moody 's Analytics , said hiring data has yet to show significant changes as a result of Obamacare .
The Treasury said the latest change does n't affect the individual mandate , which requires that most taxpayers buy insurance or pay a government fine .
In similar fashion , Treasury said the timeline has n't changed for the implementation of individual and small business exchanges -- separate marketplaces where people and business owners can shop for insurance at the state level .
`` This is just the beginning . The employer mandate is a cornerstone of the entire Obamacare exchange system , '' said Timothy Finnell , president of the Group Benefits health consulting in Memphis , Tenn .
As originally planned , only those who do n't receive affordable coverage at work can receive federal subsidies while shopping for insurance on the individual exchanges . But now that employers do n't have to abide by Obamacare reporting requirements , Finnell fears the government will have no way to verify whether someone is incorrectly getting subsidies .
`` There are going to be people who get a subsidy and end up costing taxpayers a whole lot more than anticipated , '' he said .