President Trump says the GOP is the party of great health care — but apparently it will have to wait until after the 2020 elections .
Mr. Trump appeared to wave the white flag overnight Monday , signaling that he no longer will push congressional Republicans to have a replacement for Obamacare ready to go soon .
Instead , he will take the issue to voters , asking them to give him another term and a Republican-controlled Congress .
“ If we get back the House , and on the assumption we keep the Senate and we keep the presidency — which I hope are two good assumptions — we ’ re going to have phenomenal health care , ” Mr. Trump said Tuesday at the White House .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , Kentucky Republican , said the president made the about-face after he told Mr. Trump in a phone call that it made little sense to go beyond bipartisan efforts to reduce drug prices and revisit the Obamacare wars in divided government .
Mr. McConnell said Mr. Trump intends to craft his own plan , which he will “ take to the American people during the 2020 campaign . ”
Bring it on , say Democrats , who argue that the issue has slipped from Mr. Trump and that his attempts to kill Obamacare in the courts without a clear backup plan will “ hold Americans hostage through 2020 . ”
“ When President Trump insists he has a magic plan that we can see , if only the American people reelect him , we know that ’ s just not true , ” said Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat . “ Don ’ t let President Trump fool you , America . Republicans are not the party of health care ; they ’ re the party that wants to end your health care . ”
Both parties say Obamacare has failed to fulfill its lofty promises of universal coverage , though they are taking divergent paths in the run-up to November 2020 , betting the electorate will reward their side .
Republicans insist the law was flawed from the start , has left consumers reeling from price shock and can not be repaired .
But they have struggled for years to settle on a replacement .
Democrats , meanwhile , have myriad plans that would expand the government ’ s options , such as letting Americans of all ages buy into Medicare and ushering in a government-run system that covers everyone .
Mr. Trump and his Republican allies say doubling down on government solutions amounts to socialism , though polls suggest his attacks on the existing law are backfiring .
When Obamacare took root in 2014 , polls showed its approval underwater , with more than half of Americans disliking the law , according to the Kaiser Family Foundation .
But after Mr. Trump took office and as he led congressional Republicans on a failed push to repeal the law , its popularity soared . Kaiser ’ s tracking polls said views roughly flipped , with approval ratings outpacing disapproval since early 2017 .
Mr. Trump now says he will regain the upper hand in the campaign and reverse his calls from last week for Republicans to write a bill this session .
His calls for Republican senators to devise a “ spectacular ” plan caught party leaders flat-footed .
Mr. Trump scaled back his ambitions in a series of tweets late Monday , saying the issue will be settled “ right after the Election when Republicans hold the Senate & win back the House . ”
“ It will be truly great HealthCare that will work for America , ” he tweeted .
He also appeared to be heeding Republican leaders ’ advice to keep his focus on criticizing Democrats ’ plans to expand the government role in health care .
“ It ’ s a disaster what they ’ re planning , and everyone knows it , ” he told White House reporters .
He said people who have private insurance would be forced into a government-run system .
Mr. Trump ’ s new strategy is taking pressure off congressional Republicans , though it ’ s not without risks .
Administration attorneys told an appeals court last week that they will not defend any part of Obamacare after a lower court in Texas said Congress ’ decision to gut the “ individual mandate ” penalty should topple the rest of the law , including its vast expansion of Medicaid and protections for people with preexisting conditions .
Given Mr. Trump ’ s new timeline , it ’ s not clear how his party would deal with the fallout if the ruling is upheld before the election .
“ It ’ s in the court system , nobody ’ s lost a policy over it , ” he said . “ There ’ s no point in pushing the panic button . The court system takes a long time to resolve these issues . ”
Democrats , who used the issue against Republicans with great success in last year ’ s campaigns , are eager to take the fight back to voters .
The House is scheduled to vote on a resolution Wednesday condemning the administration for its refusal to defend Obamacare in the appeals court .
In the Senate , all 47 members in the Democratic caucus introduced a parallel resolution .
Sen. Jeanne Shaheen , New Hampshire Democrat and a chief sponsor of the resolution , warned Republicans that they will face a stark choice in the coming months .
“ You can sit idly by while the president strips your constituents of their health care , ” she said , “ or you can work with us to protect Americans ’ care and improve the system . ”