A woman reads a leaflet at a health insurance enrollment event in Cudahy , Calif. , in 2014 . ( Lucy Nicholson/Reuters )
Obamacare was a misbegotten law . It addressed real , if sometimes exaggerated , problems , but did so at an unnecessarily high cost . Some of that cost was economic : A large and arbitrary subset of the population has had to pay higher premiums , deductibles , and copayments , and enjoy reduced access to medical providers . Some of it was lost freedom , as Obamacare curtailed the space for voluntary transactions and expanded the field of required ones .
Congress should not have enacted the law over public opposition in 2010 ; the Supreme Court should have struck it down in 2012 ; the Court should have stopped the Obama administration from rewriting the law to give it a broader reach in 2015 ; and Congress should have replaced the law in 2017 .
A new district-court decision striking down the law appears to give Congress an opportunity to start over . Yet we can not applaud Judge Reed O ’ Connor ’ s decision . Indeed , we deplore it . It will not lead to the replacement of Obamacare , as much as we desire that outcome . It will instead give Republicans another opportunity to dodge their responsibility to advance legislation toward that end .
It will not lead to the replacement of Obamacare because it is very likely to be overturned on appeal ; and it is very likely to be overturned on appeal because it deserves to be .
The law Congress enacted in 2010 included a command that Americans buy health insurance , and not just any health insurance but insurance that met congressional specifications . At the time , there was a broad consensus among health-care experts that without this “ individual mandate , ” the rest of Obamacare would cause health markets to unravel .
In 2012 , the Supreme Court was asked to strike the law down because that command exceeded the legitimate powers of Congress . The Court instead split the difference . It said that the Congress could not issue that command . But it could , the Court said , tax people for not buying health insurance ; and so it said that the law should go forward as though Congress had done that .
By 2017 , however , the old consensus about the necessity of the mandate to buy insurance had weakened substantially . As part of its 2017 tax-reform law , the Republican Congress , which had failed to replace Obamacare as a whole , set the tax at zero .
That ’ s where Judge O ’ Connor comes in . His ruling holds that the individual mandate can no longer be constitutionally justified as a tax now that it is set at zero , and that since Congress considered the mandate central to Obamacare when it enacted that law in 2010 , the whole thing has to go . Neither half of this argument is valid .
There is , in the first place , no longer any individual mandate to justify . The Supreme Court in 2012 eliminated it as a legal requirement on individuals to buy insurance , and the Congress eliminated it as a tax in 2017 . The government is no longer taking any unconstitutional action via this spectral , zero-dollar tax .
The deliberate decision by Congress to eliminate the tax without eliminating the rest of Obamacare , meanwhile , shows that Congress in 2017 no longer considered it essential to the law . ( O ’ Connor claims that the Congress wanted to repeal Obamacare but could not reach the required supermajority in the Senate . That a majority of both chambers would have agreed on a way to repeal Obamacare is not at all clear , and not a proper subject for speculation by a court ; and in any case Congress knew that a very likely outcome of passing the tax-reform bill was that most of the law would stay , but the tax would go . )
The Supreme Court has preserved Obamacare , as it has been implemented , even against meritorious legal challenges . It seems highly likely to preserve it against a much weaker one . Republican politicians have repeatedly counted on the courts to deliver them from Obamacare without their having to take any heat for abolishing its popular elements , to come up with workable alternatives , or to accommodate the interests of people who rely on the law while pleasing those who oppose it . O ’ Connor ’ s decision is giving them a new dodge : As it winds its way through the courts , they can continue telling the opponents of the law that victory is at hand , continue telling those who benefit from the law that they will protect them whatever happens , and — continue not working on health care .
But the courts will almost certainly not , as they should not , deliver Republicans from their duties .