The Obama administration is set to unveil new procedures that will greatly expand the government ’ s ability to verify the income of Americans who seek government subsidies under the federal health care law .
“ We ’ re going to be sampling 100 percent . There ’ s new information , ” Gary Cohen , deputy director of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , told the House Ways and Means Committee on Thursday .
He made his assurances after Chairman Dave Camp , Michigan Republican , aired concerns that enrollees in state health exchanges will self-certify their income . The administration would have to cross-check that information much later , when the enrollees file their tax returns .
Mr. Cohen said the government will verify the income of everyone who applies for subsides on the state-based exchanges , where those without employer-based insurance can shop for private health coverage with the help of premium tax credits .
Daniel Werfel , acting director of the IRS , said the tax credits will be delivered through the health exchanges , and not directly to the individual enrollees .
“ That money goes directly to the insurance company , ” Mr. Werfel said .
In opening remarks , Mr. Camp said Americans face increasing uncertainty and confusion about the Affordable Care Act with roughly 60 days to go until the state-based insurance markets begin enrollment for coverage that takes effect in January .
He cited government accountability reports that suggest the federal government is lagging in its efforts to set up exchanges in more than half the states , and the White House ’ s decision July 2 to delay by one year , to 2015 , the employer mandate requiring firms with 50 or more full-time workers to offer health insurance or pay fines .
Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius , he said , told the committee a few months ago “ that the Obama administration ‘ was on track to meet the October 1 deadline ’ for the new health care law , ” he said . “ However , over the past two months , the evidence show just the opposite is true . ”
On Friday , the House is scheduled to vote on a bill that would prevent the IRS from implementing and enforcing the health care law , a reaction to mounting distrust of the agency in the wake of a political targeting scandal in its tax-exempt organizations branch .
“ At no time is the tax data to be displayed to anyone outside of the marketplace itself , ” Mr. Werfel said Thursday in opening remarks .
Michigan Rep. Sander Levin , the ranking Democrat on the Ways and Means panel , said the hearing had been convened “ under the pretense that House Republicans are interested in learning about the implementation of the landmark law . ”
“ The Republican mission is clear : Don ’ t implement , destroy , ” he said .
“ How else , ” he added , “ can they explain why they have leaned on outside organizations , including the National Football League , to discourage them from helping to educate Americans about current law health insurance opportunities and assistance that will be available through the marketplaces ? ”