Democratic senators in red states could easily become casualties of the law . | AP Photos Senate Dems to W.H . : Fix Obamacare
Democratic senators have a warning for the White House : Fix Obamacare ’ s problems or put Senate seats at risk next year .
In interviews , Democratic senators running in 2014 , party elders and Senate leaders said the Obama administration must rescue the law from its rocky start before it emerges as a bigger political liability next year .
Democratic senators from red states — the most vulnerable incumbents up for reelection next year — voted for Obamacare and have been among the law ’ s biggest champions , believing that voters would embrace it once they experienced its benefits . They could end up being some of the law ’ s most prominent casualties if its unpopularity continues to grow .
If voters continue experiencing problems like a balky website , canceled policies and higher premiums , the fallout could be brutal next November , Democrats acknowledge .
For that reason , Senate Majority Whip Dick Durbin ( D-Ill. ) issued some blunt advice to the administration : “ Fix it . ”
Asked how it would affect Senate Democratic candidates in 2014 , the No . 2 Senate Democrat said : “ If it ’ s fixed , and when it ’ s fixed , that will decide whether the issue is a big issue next year . ”
Colorado Sen. Michael Bennet , chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee , added this when asked whether the law would be a problem for his candidates next year : “ It all depends on the implementation . ”
Democrats are clearly anxious to see the issue resolved because their most at-risk senators in 2014 voted for the measure on Christmas Eve 2009 . Those Democrats — Mark Begich of Alaska , Mark Pryor of Arkansas , Mary Landrieu of Louisiana and Kay Hagan of North Carolina — all have defended the law in the face of GOP attacks . But their frustration with the White House is showing , whether it ’ s Pryor and Hagan backing an extension of Obamacare ’ s enrollment period , Landrieu proposing legislation to ensure insurance policyholders won ’ t lose their existing coverage or Begich voicing his fury with the White House .
Asked whether the White House ’ s credibility had been shot through this latest episode , one Democratic senator said : “ You got to have it , to lose it . ”
“ Very high , ” Begich said when asked about his frustration with the White House over Obamacare . “ Personally , I spend time going to this website , going on it — giving criticism — trying to push the envelope on some of these issues and yelling at them more than once . It ’ s frustrating because we should be able to get through this . I really do believe we will . ”
Asked how it could affect his bid for a second term next year , Begich said : “ We ’ re a year out . … I ’ ve always said this : ‘ This bill needs work , has always needed work . ’ ”
While acknowledging problems , the White House says it is making an enormous push to ensure that the law ’ s hangups will soon be fixed and that millions of uninsured Americans will eventually be able to receive low-cost , quality health care coverage .
Senior administration officials argue that Democrats will be able to sell a positive story to the public over the insurance reforms enacted in the landmark law — and that the hiccups now being experienced will be largely forgotten by next year . At a private meeting last week between Senate Democrats and senior administration officials , White House chief of staff Denis McDonough reiterated that message : The law is fundamentally sound and the administration is working overtime to fix the problems , attendees said .
But administration sources acknowledge that if the problems grow , vulnerable Democrats could increasingly join the GOP ’ s call to delay major portions of the law , such as the unpopular mandate to purchase health insurance , putting major pressure on the White House to follow suit . For now , many Democrats are putting their faith in the administration to fix the problems , whether they ’ d like to or not .