Sen. John McCain John Sidney McCainCindy McCain : I can see Arizona 'going Democrat ' in 2020 Ukraine scandal shows that foreign influence is a bipartisan affair America 's newest comedy troupe : House GOP MORE ( R-Ariz. ) on Friday announced that he will vote against the latest proposal to repeal ObamaCare , potentially dooming the legislation and , with it , the GOP 's last shot at passing a health-care overhaul this year .
“ I can not in good conscience vote for the Graham-Cassidy proposal . I believe we could do better working together , Republicans and Democrats , and have not yet really tried , '' he said in a statement , referring to the legislation spearheaded by GOP Sens . Lindsey Graham Lindsey Olin GrahamIntel community watchdog appears to push back on Trump allegations of changes to whistleblower rules Democrats demand Barr , senior officials testify on Ukraine ███ 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff MORE ( S.C ) and Bill Cassidy William ( Bill ) Morgan CassidyTo win the federal paid family leave debate , allow states to lead the way Democrats divided on surprise medical bill fix America 's newest comedy troupe : House GOP MORE ( La . ) .
Republicans have been racing toward a vote on health care next week , ahead of a Sept. 30 deadline for approving the bill on a majority vote .
They had been hopeful that McCain 's close friendship with Graham and the support for the bill from Arizona 's governor would be enough to win him over .
McCain suggested the decision had weighed on him , adding that he takes `` no pleasure '' in it .
“ The bill ’ s authors are my dear friends , and I think the world of them . I know they are acting consistently with their beliefs and sense of what is best for the country . So am I , '' he said .
Graham quickly weighed in on McCain 's decision , saying he disagrees but their friendship will survive .
`` My friendship with John McCain is not based on how he votes but respect for how he ’ s lived his life and the person he is , '' he said on Twitter .
Graham added that `` I respectfully disagree '' with McCain and `` intend to push forward for state-centric health care vs Washington-knows-best health care . ''
Cassidy said he was `` disappointed '' in McCain 's decision but pledged that he would continue to work for families `` being penalized because they ca n't afford insurance . ''
Supporters of Graham-Cassidy , which is also co-sponsored by Republican Sens . Ron Johnson Ronald ( Ron ) Harold JohnsonIntel community watchdog appears to push back on Trump allegations of changes to whistleblower rules GOP senators urge Barr to probe Clinton , Ukraine GOP senator : Trump has changed presidency 'not necessarily toward the positive ' MORE ( Wis. ) and Dean Heller Dean Arthur HellerThis week : Barr back in hot seat over Mueller report Trump suggests Heller lost reelection bid because he was 'hostile ' during 2016 presidential campaign Trump picks ex-oil lobbyist David Bernhardt for Interior secretary MORE ( Nev. ) , argue that it 's the GOP 's last chance to keep their promise to roll back former President Obama 's signature law .
The bill seeks to give more power to the states by converting dollars currently spent on ObamaCare ’ s subsidies and Medicaid expansion into block grants to states . The bill would also allow states to waive ObamaCare regulations , including those protecting people with pre-existing conditions from being charged higher premiums .
Though McCain 's opposition does n't formally kill the legislation , it leaves leadership with a daunting task : Winning over every other member of a caucus that includes both moderates and firebrand conservatives .
Sen. Rand Paul ( R-Ky. ) has already said he opposes the bill because it does n't go far enough in repealing ObamaCare .
Other senators fear the bill 's impact on state budgets and insurance coverage . Sen. Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsYes , President Trump , we do have a homelessness crisis and you 're making it harder for us to address The policy-driven presidential campaign could be drowned out by impeachment Flake tells GOP : Trump 'does not deserve reelection ' MORE ( R-Maine ) on Friday said she is `` leaning against '' the bill , and several other key senators — including GOP Sen. Lisa Murkowski Lisa Ann MurkowskiRepublicans show signs of discomfort in defense of Trump GOP battens down the hatches after release of Trump whistleblower complaint Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran MORE ( Alaska ) — remain on the fence .
Three `` no '' votes would be enough to kill the legislation .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison ( Mitch ) Mitchell McConnellOvernight Defense : Dems subpoena Giuliani for Ukraine docs | DOJ says Trump contacted foreign countries over Russia inquiry | Top Armed Services Republican Thornberry to retire | Milley sworn in as top general ███ 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff US sanctions Russian individuals for interference in 2018 elections MORE ( R-Ky. ) earlier this week said he intends to hold a vote on Graham-Cassidy next week , but McCain 's announcement throws those plans in doubt .
Sen. Joni Ernst Joni Kay ErnstOvernight Health Care : Dem seeks changes to Pelosi drug pricing bill | Trump officials shift family planning funds from Planned Parenthood | CVS halts sales of Zantac over cancer concerns To win the federal paid family leave debate , allow states to lead the way GOP senators attack whistleblower 's credibility MORE ( R-Iowa ) , speaking at a town hall in Iowa City , floated that next week 's vote could be pulled .
`` I 'll be honest , it seems unlikely that we 'll be voting on this , '' she said , according to The Washington Post .
Republicans had been open with their skepticism that the Graham-Cassidy legislation could get the needed 50 votes .
Sen. Chuck Grassley Charles ( Chuck ) Ernest GrassleyIntel community watchdog appears to push back on Trump allegations of changes to whistleblower rules GOP senators urge Barr to probe Clinton , Ukraine GOP senator : Trump has changed presidency 'not necessarily toward the positive ' MORE ( R-Iowa ) told Iowa reporters that Republicans were still at least two votes short `` and I don ’ t see those other one or two votes coming . ''
And Sen. Ted Cruz Rafael ( Ted ) Edward CruzHillicon Valley : Treasury sanctions Russians over 2018 election meddling | How Facebook fought back on FTC fine | WeWork calls off IPO | Elon Musk unveils Mars rocket Cambridge Analytica whistleblower 's book coming out next week O'Rourke : Trump should resign MORE ( R-Texas ) told conservative radio host Michael Berry that `` it 's not clear if we 're going to get to 50 votes or not . ''
McCain , who has brain cancer , cast the decisive vote that halted the GOP 's first ObamaCare repeal effort over the summer . With a dramatic thumbs down on the Senate floor , he stopped that legislation in its tracks .
Murkowski and Collins also voted against that `` skinny '' repeal bill .
McCain at the time complained the legislation had been rushed to the floor without going through the normal committee process , and he leveled that same complaint against Graham-Cassidy .