The Supreme Court may have ruled ObamaCare is constitutional , but implementing the controversial federal law would become a crime in South Carolina if a bill passed by the state House becomes law .
The bill , approved Wednesday by a vote of 65-39 , declares President Obama 's signature legislation `` null and void . '' Whereas the law that Obama pushed and Congress passed is known as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , South Carolina 's law would be known as the Freedom of Health Care Protection Act .
It would prohibit state officials and employees from `` enforcing or attempting to enforce such unconstitutional laws '' and `` establish criminal penalties and civil liability '' for those who engage in activities that aid the implementation of ObamaCare .
The Supreme Court ruled last year that ObamaCare 's underlying provision , requiring all Americans to obtain health insurance , is constitutional , though lawsuits still are pending that argue against certain parts of that mandate -- in particular , contraceptive coverage , which some Christian employers argue violates their religious beliefs .
In South Carolina , the nullification bill would allow the state attorney general to take action against anyone causing harm by the implementation of ObamaCare . It proceeds to the state Senate for committee review , according to The Washington Times .
Gov . Nikki Haley has rejected the expansion of Medicaid insurance rolls under a joint federal-state program for low-income Americans , which is an anchor of the law Obama signed in 2010 .
`` Not in South Carolina , '' Haley declared at the Conservative Political Action Conference in March . `` We will not expand Medicaid on President Obama 's watch . We will not expand Medicaid ever . ''
Other parts of ObamaCare have already started to fray , even before full implementation .
The Obama administration now says a special system of exchanges designed to make it easier for small businesses to provide insurance will be delayed an entire year -- to 2015 .
`` Lots of small businesses struggle with providing insurance for their workers so this was supposed to facilitate it and make it easier for small business to do this , '' Jim Capretta of the Ethics and Public Policy Center , told ███ last month . `` It was a huge portion of the sale job . When they passed the law in 2010 there were many senators and members of Congress who were saying ' I am doing this because it 's going to help small businesses . ' ''