Donald Trump ’ s embrace of the American Health Care Act , authored by Paul Ryan and other House Republicans seemingly in collaboration with establishment-minded members of his administration , represents a massive betrayal of his own clear and repeated promises to the American people .
To an extent , sophisticated political journalists always knew Trump was likely to break those promises . And his embrace of conventional , conservative House Republicans such as Mick Mulvaney to run the Office of Management and Budget and Tom Price to run the Department of Health and Human Services was a clear indication that he intended to break them . But it would be a mistake to simply gloss over this breach of faith .
Trump ’ s embrace of more centrist positions on health care and retirement security was a crucial aspect of his campaign , and there was enough campaign-season tension between Trump and the GOP leadership that a voter could be forgiven for assuming Trump meant what he was saying .
He did not . Trump ran and won promising to cover everyone , avoid Medicaid cuts , and boost funding for opioid abuse treatment . He is now lobbying Congress to pass a bill that does none of those things . Instead , millions will lose insurance and Medicaid spending will be sacrificed on the altar of tax cuts for the rich .
It ’ s not a surprising result , but in many ways it is a shocking one .
Donald Trump did not run a wonkish campaign heavily focused on detailed white papers or background briefings with experts . He did , however , make some pretty clear promises on health care policy .
“ I ’ m not going to cut Social Security like every other Republican and I ’ m not going to cut Medicare or Medicaid , ” Trump told the conservative Daily Signal way back in May 2015 . “ Every other Republican is going to cut , and even if they wouldn ’ t , they don ’ t know what to do because they don ’ t know where the money is . I do . ”
I was the first & only potential GOP candidate to state there will be no cuts to Social Security , Medicare & Medicaid . Huckabee copied me . — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) May 7 , 2015
This was , strikingly , not a general election pivot to the center , but a commitment Trump made as a candidate in the GOP primary .
That fall , his promises got even bigger . `` I am going to take care of everybody , '' he told 60 Minutes . `` I don ’ t care if it costs me votes or not . Everybody ’ s going to be taken care of much better than they ’ re taken care of now . ''
Even after the election , Trump continued to insist that his plan was to offer patients a more generous deal than they were getting from the Affordable Care Act .
In an early January interview with the Washington Post , he said that Trumpcare would feature “ insurance for everybody , ” in contrast to an ACA that , while bringing the uninsurance rate to a historic low , has still left 25 million people without coverage . The plans , he said , would have “ much lower deductibles. ” And ability to pay , he said , wouldn ’ t be an issue . “ There was a philosophy in some circles that if you can ’ t pay for it , you don ’ t get it . That ’ s not going to happen with us . ”
The centerpiece of the Trump-endorsed American Health Care Act , by contrast , is a $ 600 billion tax cut . Families with incomes below $ 208,500 per year will see their taxes fall by an average of $ 0 per year , receiving none of that money . But members of the top 0.1 percent of the income distribution — households with an annual income of more than $ 3.75 million — will see their taxes fall by an average of $ 165,090 per year .
If you are a multimillionaire and someone in your family gets sick , in other words , AHCA is going to be great for you .
But when you take $ 600 billion out of the American health care system and funnel it to a small elite group of people , the inevitable result is that everyone else has to get by with less .
Since Republicans are trying to get the bill into the end zone without an official analysis from the Congressional Budget Office , which would project how many people the plan would cover and how much it would cost , it ’ s hard to know for sure exactly how many people with go with how much less . But Standard & Poor ’ s thinks 6 million to 10 million people will lose insurance , while Brookings analysts think the number may be 15 million or higher .
Tom Price on Brookings estimate 15-M will lose health coverage under GOP bill : `` we don ’ t believe that individuals will lose coverage at all '' — John Harwood ( @ JohnJHarwood ) March 10 , 2017
The administration ’ s current strategy is to simply lie about this and say that nobody is going to lose coverage . But that ’ s absurd . To enact an enormous tax cut under budget reconciliation rules , you need offsetting long-term spending cuts . That ’ s why the bill shifts $ 370 billion in Medicaid costs onto state governments , some of which will obviously respond by throwing people off of the program . AHCA also drastically reduces federal subsidies to help people pay for insurance — in 11 high-cost states , the subsidies are cut in half — meaning many people will drop out .
While cutting financial assistance overall to ensure that most people are worse off , the American Health Care Act also specifically advantages and disadvantages certain groups of people relative to the ACA . In particular , residents of rural areas where the cost of health insurance is inherently higher due to reduced competition will get less help under the AHCA . Older Americans will also face drastically higher premiums due to laxer regulation of insurance companies .
This means that not only will Trump be betraying his promises in general , but , as Nate Cohn writes for the New York Times , he ’ ll be specifically harming people who voted for him the most .
They do n't know and if they did , they probably would n't care . https : //t.co/lPxfHloMff — Jonathan Weisman ( @ jonathanweisman ) March 10 , 2017
Jonathan Weisman , a political editor at the Times , breezily asserts that Trump voters “ probably wouldn ’ t care ” about this even if they understood it . It ’ s certainly true that Trump voters might still support Trump all things considered , regardless of his health care plan , since they likely agree with him about guns , immigration , the environment , abortion , and other topics . But Trump probably didn ’ t run around the country promising people lower deductibles , universal coverage , and no cuts to Medicaid for no reason at all . He said that stuff because it ’ s popular .
He broke with the Republican establishment on a key issue , soundly beat their candidates in the primary , and then won a general election boosted by considerable outsider credibility but an unusually low level of institutional party support . And now , in his first major legislative act , he ’ s betraying that promise .