President Obama touted a provision in his Affordable Care Act on Thursday that would require health insurance providers to return money to consumers , pushing back on Republican criticism a day after the GOP-led House voted to delay key parts of the law .
The president ’ s signature health care overhaul -- commonly referred to as ObamaCare -- has come under fire by many Republicans who have worked to defeat , delay or gut major parts of it .
At the White House event Thursday , Obama highlighted more of the financial benefits tied to it -- specifically , a half billion dollars in rebates going to 9 million people under a provision of the law .
Insurers must spend at least 80 cents of every dollar on medical care or quality improvement , or refund the difference . That 's the $ 500 million consumers are getting in rebates averaging about $ 100 . For Americans who get insurance through their work , the rebates go to their employers to be refunded or used to lower premiums .
`` If they 're not spending your premium dollars on health care , they have to give you some money back , '' Obama said , appearing with a group of health care consumers in the East Room .
The president ’ s comments come a day after House lawmakers voted to delay two key components of ObamaCare , in an effort to chip away at the plan after the administration acknowledged new issues with its implementation .
Obama also noted that some states , ahead of the law 's requirement that most Americans obtain health insurance , are anticipating lower premiums because of health insurance marketplaces that are being set up under the law so consumers can comparison shop for the coverage .
Obama pushed his pitch a day after the Republican-controlled House voted for the 38th time to eliminate , cut funding or scale back the 3-year-old law since the GOP took control of the House in January 2011 .
Republican leaders swiftly organized the votes after the administration , in early July , said it would delay until 2015 a requirement that businesses with 50 or more workers provide insurance coverage or pay a penalty .
The House voted 264-161 for a measure that would do exactly that . But they also voted 251-174 for a measure that would delay the individual mandate -- the requirement on individuals to buy health insurance -- for a year as well .
Republicans argue that both delays are necessary . While they endorsed the delay for businesses , House Speaker John Boehner and other GOP lawmakers say it 's unfair to deny everyone else a similar reprieve .
`` It is not fair that the president is choosing to protect big business from ObamaCare , but not hardworking American taxpayers , '' Rep. Marsha Blackburn , R-Tenn. , said on the House floor ahead of the vote .
She also said the delay was an admission that `` this is a train wreck , and it is not ready for prime-time . ''
But Democrats sharply disagreed , and accused Republicans of wasting time with yet another set of votes against the health care law . Rep. Joseph Crowley , D-N.Y. , said Republicans were n't simply trying to delay the requirements . `` It is their intention to destroy the Affordable Care Act ... to do away with it , to annihilate it entirely , '' Crowley said .
The votes marked the 38th time the GOP majority has tried to eliminate , defund or scale back the program since Republicans took control of the House in January 2011 . It is unlikely the Democrat-controlled Senate will advance the latest bills .