House Republicans are escalating their scrutiny of the decision to delay a key part of the health care overhaul , questioning whether the Obama administration even has the authority to `` ignore the law '' without the approval of Congress .
The administration announced early last week that it was delaying by one year a requirement that large employers offer access to health insurance . Officials described the delay as a common-sense concession to businesses who complained the rules were too onerous , and maintained the Treasury Department was within its right .
A Treasury official told FoxNews.com that the move was `` an exercise of the administrative authority '' under the IRS code . The official said the department has `` longstanding '' authority to `` grant transition relief when implementing new legislation '' like the health care law .
A number of Republicans pointed to the sudden change as a sign of problems to come with the massive health care law . But , as lawmakers return on Monday from the holiday break , they 're also challenging whether the tweak was an abuse of power .
`` This action raises a lot of questions about whether the Obama administration can simply ignore the law when it 's convenient for them , '' Rep. Phil Roe , R-Tenn. , said in a statement .
He said he 's asked the Congressional Research Service to `` investigate '' that issue -- `` because I do n't think any president has the authority to pick and choose what parts of law to follow . ''
The matter will get an airing on Capitol Hill later this week . Rep. Kevin Brady , R-Texas , chairman of a House Ways and Means subcommittee , has set a hearing for July 10 which , in part , will examine the issue of the administration 's authority to change the law .
Rep. Darrell Issa , R-Calif. , chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee , went a step further , describing the move as `` another in a string of extra legal actions taken '' by the Obama administration .
The complaint about the administration 's authority is just one of several Republicans have regarding the move to delay the mandate . They question whether more delays and changes are in store in the run-up to the Jan. 1 launch of many of the law 's major provisions . They question why the so-called individual mandate -- the requirement on individuals to buy health insurance -- was n't also delayed .
But the Treasury Department and White House , in announcing the delay last week , explained that they did so after businesses complained about the reporting requirements . As the administration moves to simplify the rules , they said , they would in turn give businesses more time to comply .
`` We have heard concerns about the complexity of the requirements and the need for more time to implement them effectively . We recognize that the vast majority of businesses that will need to do this reporting already provide health insurance to their workers , and we want to make sure it is easy for others to do so , '' Mark J. Mazur , the assistant secretary for Tax Policy at the Department of the Treasury , said last week on the Treasury blog .