There are many good arguments to be made in favor of Trumpcare , but this is not one of them .
Of all the arguments to make for repealing and replacing Obamacare , the very worst is that people don ’ t need health insurance .
Yet this is a Trump administration talking point . White House press secretary Sean Spicer told reporters last week , “ When we get asked the question , ‘ How many people are going to get covered ? ’ that ’ s not the question that should be asked. ” Pressed on the merits of the bill by George Stephanopoulos on ABC ’ s This Week , Office of Management and Budget director Mick Mulvaney shot back , “ You ’ re worried about getting people covered. ” As if that ’ s a woeful mistake .
This is a strange rhetorical tack for officials in an administration led by a president who pledged to cover everyone . Nor is it substantively or political defensible . Repealing and replacing Obamacare will require every ounce of persuasiveness that Republicans can muster , especially with the Congressional Budget Office now estimating that under Trumpcare , 14 million fewer people will be insured in 2018 . The early signs aren ’ t encouraging .
It is true that health insurance isn ’ t a panacea . There is an academic debate about whether having health insurance leads to longer lives , and all sorts of factors besides insurance affect health and the quality of medical care ( geography , for instance , can have more of an impact on care than whether someone is insured ) .
Still , there is abundant evidence of the benefits of insurance . Research has found that Romneycare in Massachusetts improved measures of physical and mental health . A Rice University study of the Houston area found that people with insurance report being in better health than those who lack it . If nothing else , insurance is protection against catastrophic health expenses and provides a sense of security .
This is true even of Medicaid , an insurance program so inadequate that it is the next best thing to having no insurance at all . A landmark study of Medicaid in Oregon examined what effect the program had on recipients . The study didn ’ t find better health outcomes . What it did find is that recipients were less likely to need to skimp on other payments or borrow money due to medical expenses , and had better mental health . These are not small things , and it is foolish to minimize them .
Republicans obviously shouldn ’ t accept the premises of their detractors . By all means , they should hit the dubious methodology of the CBO , which vastly overestimated how many people would be covered on the Obamacare exchanges in the first place . And they should point out Obamacare ’ s manifest failings , including an overreliance on the deeply flawed Medicaid program and insurance exchanges that are shaky at best ( the executive of Aetna recently said they are in a “ death spiral ” ) .
But the best response to criticisms that Trumpcare doesn ’ t cover enough people is simple and more fundamental — to get the coverage numbers up . If the headline-grabbing numbers from the CBO don ’ t prompt the GOP to realize this , nothing will . Making the tax credit in the Republican plan more generous further down the income scale would be a start . President Trump ’ s promises about universal coverage aren ’ t achievable , but to lurch in the other direction and dismiss the significance of health insurance is politically poisonous .
At its best , the Trump phenomenon pointed to a GOP more grounded in the economic realities of working-class life . It is remarkable , then , that the first major legislative priority out of the box is being sold , in part , in stereotypically Republican terms , and by Trump ’ s own team . The arguments that they are making in public are the kinds of things you might have expected to hear at a private fundraiser of the sort that undid Mitt Romney when he famously dismissed “ the 47 percent . ”
Before going further down this road , they should think about why Trump , with his keen gut-level political instinct , never told audiences or interviewers that he ’ d be fine with fewer people having insurance , and adjust their rhetoric and their plan accordingly .