With companies set to face fines next year for not complying with the new mandate to offer health insurance , some are pursuing strategies like enrolling employees in Medicaid to avoid penalties and hold down costs .
The health law ’ s penalties , which can amount to about $ 2,000 per employee , were supposed to start this year , but the Obama administration delayed them until 2015 , when they take effect for firms that employ at least 100 people .
Now , as employers race to find ways to cover their full-time workers while holding a lid on costs , insurance brokers and benefits administrators are pitching a variety of options , sometimes exploiting wrinkles in the law .
The Medicaid option is drawing particular interest from companies with low-wage workers , brokers say . If an employee qualifies for Medicaid , which is jointly funded by the federal government and the states , the employer pays no penalty for that coverage .
“ You ’ re taking advantage of the law as written , ” said Adam Okun , a senior vice president at New York insurance broker Frenkel Benefits LLC .
Locals 8 Restaurant Group LLC , with about 1,000 workers , already offers health coverage , and next year plans to dial back some employees ’ premium contributions . That is because an employer can owe penalties if its coverage doesn ’ t meet the law ’ s standard for affordability .
But the company , which is based in Hartford , Conn. , hopes to reduce its costs by offering eligible employees a chance to enroll in Medicaid , using a contractor called BeneStream Inc. to help them sign up . The government program is more affordable for employees and saves money for Locals 8 , said Chief Executive Al Gamble . “ The burden gets shifted to Medicaid , ” he said .
Such maneuvers could fuel controversy . Big employers with significant Medicaid enrollment in their workforces have been a political flash point in some states . The health law aimed to expand Medicaid eligibility to most people with incomes at or below 138 % of the federal poverty level , but not all states have adopted that standard .
“ We ’ ve got to be careful about not fooling ourselves into thinking everybody wins , ” said Matt Salo , executive director of the National Association of Medicaid Directors . “ The cost to the taxpayer does go up significantly . ”
BeneStream said its business is growing rapidly . “ The economics of this are what ’ s driving change , ” said CEO Ben Geyerhahn . The law “ created this as a valid waiver ” for employers .
Another idea gaining ground with employers is offering bare-bones , or “ skinny , ” health plans that cover preventive care but exclude major benefits like hospital coverage . These low-cost plans differ from the now-illegal “ mini-med ” plans that capped benefits . Though skinny plans offer a narrow range of benefits , they don ’ t limit payouts .
Making such plans available allows employers to avoid the approximately $ 2,000-per-employee penalty for not offering coverage to at least 70 % of their full-timers . And workers who sign up won ’ t face the law ’ s penalties for individuals lacking insurance .
Since skinny plans don ’ t meet the federal standard of covering 60 % of the cost of medical care , they can still leave an employer vulnerable to a different fine—about $ 3,000 for each worker who opts out and instead gets a federally subsidized plan through an insurance exchange . Employees can ’ t get subsidies if their employer offers insurance that meets the law ’ s standards for coverage and affordability .
Major insurers such as UnitedHealth Group Inc. and Cigna Corp. are marketing skinny plans . Cigna said it offers such plans alongside richer alternatives and with “ transparent and clear communication to ensure customers fully understand their health-care coverage choices. ” The insurer said companies have shown growing interest in the plans , but relatively few have adopted them .
UnitedHealth said it works with clients to identify plans that comply with the Affordable Care Act and “ meet their needs . ”
Other vendors say interest in skinny plans is brisk . “ It ’ s just crazy how many we ’ re writing , ” said Jeff McPeters , a principal owner at Group & Pension Administrators Inc .
Ruiz Protective Service Inc. , a 400-employee firm that provides security services and polygraph tests , plans to start a skinny plan in January . The company can ’ t afford the about $ 2,000-per-worker penalty or traditional insurance , according to owner Hector Ruiz , who said the new plan “ will satisfy the law and not put us out of business. ” He said he thinks the preventive-care policies will be affordable for employees , and the company will be upfront about the coverage limits .
Consumer advocates have raised red flags about skinny plans . “ If coverage doesn ’ t protect them when they get sick , it doesn ’ t do much for ” workers , said Cheryl Fish-Parcham , private-insurance program director at the nonprofit group Families USA .
A Treasury Department spokeswoman said the department “ will continue to monitor possible employer actions that might be contrary to the intent of the law and consider what responses , if any , might be appropriate . ”
Federal officials have said most large employers already offer coverage that meets the law ’ s requirements . The companies worried about penalties are largely in industries with significant low-wage workforces , such as restaurants , nursing homes and hospitality . Previously , many of these companies didn ’ t offer coverage to hourly workers or had mini-med plans .
Some employers are mixing strategies to hold down costs . Garden Fresh Restaurant Corp. , parent of the 128-unit Sweet Tomatoes and Souplantation restaurant chains , has been hiring part-time workers as full-timers have left . The law doesn ’ t require companies to offer coverage to part-timers working less than 30 hours a week .
Next year , Garden Fresh plans to offer full-timers a high-deductible plan that meets all of the law ’ s requirements . To limit enrollment it won ’ t cover spouses or domestic partners who have coverage available through their own employers .
“ We ’ ve been able to mitigate quite a bit of the costs , ” said CEO John Morberg . Garden Fresh expects only about 20 % of previously ineligible front-line restaurant workers to sign up for coverage . “ If it exceeds that , we ’ ll have to go to the menu board to raise prices , ” Mr. Morberg said .
At least a few companies are resigned to paying penalties , but are trying to minimize the bite . Paul Dalrymple , owner of five Buffalo ’ s Cafes in Georgia , doesn ’ t plan to offer coverage to his 200 employees . To limit his exposure , Mr. Dalrymple is trying to keep the number of eligible workers to a minimum . He said he has begun cutting hours of everyone but managers and cooks to 29.5 a week , and he is hiring more part-timers to make up the lost hours .