Now that the president has lost the “ Morning Joe ” crowd , ObamaCare may be in even deeper political trouble than we thought .
The MSNBC chatfest is generally sympathetic to the administration . And Joe Scarborough , a former Republican congressman , has been training most of his fire on members of his party who led the ill-fated government shutdown .
But with the feds back in business , and the media spotlight predictably back on the bungled health care effort , the punditocracy has really turned on the rollout that President Obama felt compelled to defend at a White House event yesterday .
Mark Halperin , the “ Game Change ” coauthor and a regular on Joe ’ s show , called the rollout “ unacceptable ” and added that “ the secrecy is unacceptable , ” accusing the administration of withholding information about how many people have signed up .
His fellow panelist , liberal commentator Mike Barnicle , ratcheted up from there : “ They ’ re lying about it now , ” he said . “ They ’ re not depriving us of information , they are outright lying. ” The former Boston Globe columnist called the administration ’ s conduct “ unacceptable . ”
On “ CBS This Morning , ” the network ’ s political director , John Dickerson , calls the rollout “ a total fiasco , ” saying the administration is getting into a “ credibility death spiral . ”
This is , to put it mildly , a very difficult media environment . It ’ s not that all these pundits have turned against the idea of health insurance exchanges ; it ’ s that they believe the execution has been badly botched .
To them , the issue is incompetence—an easier target for journalists wary of taking an ideological stance .
Obama ’ s speech yesterday was not the mea culpa some had predicted . He vowed to fix what he called “ kinks ” in the system , but generally delivered an upbeat defense of the program .
As liberal Washington Post blogger Ezra Klein tweeted in mid-address , “ So far , this seems weirdly similar to the speech Obama would ’ ve given if the exchanges were working fine . ”
But they ’ re not working fine , and White House reporters pressed Jay Carney aggressively about what the president knew , when he knew it and whether the administration owes the country an apology . ( During the shutdown , you ’ ll recall , the press corps didn ’ t ask the president a single ObamaCare question at a news conference . )
The New York Times , which has been doing solid reporting on ObamaCare ’ s problems , dropped this latest bomb : “ Federal contractors have identified most of the main problems crippling President Obama ’ s online health insurance marketplace , but the administration has been slow to issue orders for fixing those flaws , and some contractors worry that the system may be weeks away from operating smoothly , people close to the project say . ”
“ It ’ s not the GOP that President Barack Obama has to worry about in defending his botched health care rollout , it ’ s fellow Democrats .
“ They voted for the law , sang its praises for three-plus years and still believe in the promise of health care reform . But now they face a conundrum : stay in lock step with Obama and risk their credibility as advocates for the law ’ s benefits or publicly criticize the administration for its recent problems — especially a failure to more quickly acknowledge , and rectify , the major malfunction of its Internet marketplace . ”
Conservatives , who have always hated the program , are very much in I-told-you-so mode . But even the administration ’ s natural media allies are finding the rollout hard to defend , at least for now .
Some interesting thoughts from eBay founder Pierre Omidyar , interviewed by the NYT ’ s David Carr , on the new journalism venture he is underwriting , perhaps with as much as $ 250 million :
“ We ’ ve lived in Hawaii for about seven years and I saw a gap in coverage as newsrooms were merging — there was a real reduction in reporting capacity and so I felt it was critical to just build a newsroom that is exclusively focused on public affairs . I wanted to get my hands dirty learning what it ’ s like to work with journalists and editors day in and day out , to see how the sausage is made . Through that experience , I saw firsthand the impact that really good investigative stories have at every level and so this is the next step in a very long journey . ”
And a clue to what attracted Omidyar to his new partner , Glenn Greenwald :
“ Even before the Snowden leaks , we saw a number of what I would characterize as missteps by the Justice Department . We saw the Justice Department wiretap the A.P . newsroom . We saw [ ███ reporter James ] Rosen being labeled as co-conspirator label in affidavits ; we see the many leak prosecutions including the use of the Espionage Act . It alerted me to the fact that even in this great country of ours with this fantastic Constitution , there ’ s a real pressure against press freedoms that ’ s going on . Perhaps unintentionally in the hot pursuit of leakers and trying to protect secrets , we are really putting pressure on press freedom here . When you have mass surveillance , it ’ s impossible to meet the intent of the First Amendment because reporters can ’ t talk to sources because sources are afraid to talk . ”
Whether Omidyar ( and Jeff Bezos at the Washington Post , which Omidyar also considered buying ) can help reinvent the news business is a fascinating challenge .