New Orleans ( CNN ) - As the Supreme Court prepares to make a historic ruling on the fate of President Barack Obama 's health care law , his top adviser shifted attention on the rest of the White House 's legislative agenda rather than the potential dismantling of its signature piece of legislation .
Valerie Jarrett , Obama 's senior adviser and close family friend , told a group of black journalists Saturday that the administration is prepared for the court 's decision – which could come as early as Monday – then went on to attack Republicans in Congress for what she called a strategy of `` no . ''
- Check out the CNN Electoral Map and Calculator and game out your own strategy for November .
`` The Affordable Care Act is a very important piece of legislation that we spent a great deal of time crafting , '' Jarrett told CNN , but , pointing to legislation on fair pay for women , tax cuts for working families and college tax breaks , added , `` he had a lot more going on than the Affordable Care Act . ''
Still , she admitted that the administration was out-maneuvered by Republicans in the months following the law 's passage , as the other side turned up the drumbeat to repeal what they called `` Obamacare . ''
`` The opponents of it out-organized – in terms of the 'death panels ' - and distorted what we were doing early on . ''
She then lashed out at what she called the `` obstructionist '' GOP members in Congress .
`` It 's been very disappointing that the Republicans in Congress put politics ahead of the economy , '' she said . `` Their strategy has been to say 'no , ' even to the detriment of the American people . ''
She added : `` I think , given how obstructionist the Republicans in Congress were , the president accomplished an enormous amount . ''
Jarrett , in New Orleans to address the annual convention of the National Association of Black Journalists , spoke for about an hour on a wide range of issues , from health care and immigration to gay marriage and the state of political discourse in the country . Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney , campaign advisers and GOP representatives were also invited to speak at the event , but declined repeated requests , according to event organizers .
Jarrett reflected on her lowest personal moment working at the White House .
`` The lowest low I can tell you was the debt-ceiling debacle ( of 2011 ) . It was the time that really crystallized to me that the Republicans were willing to just run the car right off the cliff . ''
On the president 's recent announcement of his support for gay marriage , Jarrett pushed back against criticism that the timing of the decision was less about the issue and more about pure politics .
`` He made the decision when he was comfortable making the decision . It was a very personal decision . He could n't accelerate that process any faster than he did . This was not something he was doing for politically opportunistic reasons , '' she said .
On Obama 's clearly frustrated reaction to being interrupted by a conservative reporter during his White House remarks on immigration , Jarret said , `` He 's human . ''
`` Does he get frustrated from time to time ? Of course he does . He 's human . Does he let that frustration linger ? He ca n't afford to . He 's president of the United States . He 's got to get back to work . ''
On the current level of political discourse in the country , she pointed to the conversations happening on the internet .
`` There is a coarseness to the dialogue , generally , '' she said . `` Look no further than the comments section online to see how coarse our dialogue is getting towards one another . ''
Jarrett , who is widely seen as Obama 's closest adviser and who has known the first couple for more than 20 years – she was even the first to 'vet ' Obama when he and Michelle first started dating – said she has no desire to run for elected office , even though she considered a Senate seat after Obama 's election in 2008 .
`` I do n't have that appetite , I really do n't , '' she said . `` It does n't get any better than what I 'm doing now . Being in the White House is just the most extraordinary experience of my life . It 's a good note to end my public service . ''