Democrats also intend to convene hearings to spotlight the sweeping impact of the Texas ruling — and lay the groundwork for their case to reclaim the White House in 2020 . If upheld on appeal , the decision could deprive an estimated 17 million Americans of their health insurance — including millions who gained coverage through the law ’ s expansion of Medicaid . Still others could see premiums skyrocket as price protections for pre-existing conditions lapse .
The immediate practical effect of the ruling was not clear . While the judge declared that the whole law was invalid , as Texas and 19 other states had asserted , he did not issue an injunction to stop federal officials from enforcing it , and the effects of the judgment could be delayed pending appeals .
But the timing of the decision seemed designed to maximize political reverberations . It came a day before open enrollment was to end for coverage under the health law for the coming year . Sign-ups were already expected to dip after successive blows to the law by Congress and the Trump administration . But the passage of statewide referendums last month and the election of Democratic governors could also mean coverage expansions in the coming year under the health law ’ s Medicaid expansion .
In an email to millions of Americans on Saturday , the Trump administration tried to allay concerns caused by the court decision in the Texas case .
The case is “ still moving through the courts , ” said the message from the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services . “ The marketplaces are still open for business , and we will continue with open enrollment . There will be no impact to enrollees ’ current coverage or their coverage in a 2019 plan . ”
But Mr. Trump was in a celebratory mood . “ It was a big , big victory by a highly respected judge , highly , highly respected in Texas , and on the assumption that the Supreme Court upholds , we will get great , great health care for our people , ” Mr. Trump told reporters on Saturday . “ We ’ ll have to sit down with the Democrats to do it , but I ’ m sure they want to do it also . ”