The Trump administration said Saturday that it was suspending $ 10.4 billion in payments expected by Obamacare insurers , citing a federal judge 's ruling in a lawsuit over a program 's formula guidelines .
`` We were disappointed by the court ’ s recent ruling , '' Seema Verma , administrator for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) , which administers the program , told The Wall Street Journal in a statement .
`` As a result of this litigation , billions of dollars in risk adjustment payments and collections are now on hold , '' she said .
CMS officials did not say how long the suspension would last or what would cause payments to be restored .
The federal court ruling prevents the agency , which administers the Obamacare risk-adjustment program , from making further collections or payments , including those for the 2017 benefit year , until the litigation is resolved , the agency said .
CMS said that the amount frozen for the 2017 benefit year is $ 10.4 billion , which is drawn from insurers to go to other insurers .
The funds were expected to go out this fall , the Journal reports .
In February , U.S. District Judge James Browning in Albuquerque , N.M. , ruled that the formula used by CMS to calculate payments in the risk-adjustment program was flawed and had not been adequately justified by federal regulators .
The program is critical to markets under the Affordable Care Act because insurers with healthier consumers enrolled in plans reimburse insurers with sicker and more expensive enrollees .
The goal of the payouts was to encourage all insurers to participate in the Obamacare exchanges and enroll all kinds of customers versus only targeting young , healthy people , according to the report .
New Mexico Health Connections and Minuteman Health of Massachusetts , two small nonprofit insurers , filed lawsuits in 2016 , contending that the Obama administration created an inaccurate formula that unfairly rewarded large insurers .
In the Massachusetts case , however , a federal judge upheld the Obamacare formula , the Journal reports .