If President Obama wants to feel better about his sinking job approval , he need only look down Pennsylvania Avenue : Congress is down to 9 percent , according to the latest Allstate/National Journal Heartland Monitor Poll . That makes Mr. Obama ’ s 38 percent approval rating in the same poll look downright robust .
But as the clock ticks toward Nov. 30 , when the Obama administration promised to have HealthCare.gov working smoothly for the “ vast majority ” of consumers , the negative headlines continue . Now , the White House acknowledges , 1 in 5 will still not be able to sign up for health insurance on the website by the end of the month , though only in part for technical reasons .
And on Monday night , House Republicans released a document indicating that consultants warned the Obama administration as early as March that the development of HealthCare.gov was in serious trouble . A White House spokesman notes that while this document , a report by the consulting firm McKinsey & Co. , is new to the public , the point that the administration had advance warning of problems isn ’ t .
Still , `` nobody anticipated the size and scope of the problems we experienced once the site launched , ” White House spokesman Eric Schultz said in a statement .
And the jury is still out on whether Obama ’ s “ fix ” to the Affordable Care Act – allowing insurers to extend canceled health policies for a year – will take away the sting from being caught falsely promising that people would be able to keep their old health plans under his reform .
The “ second-term blues ” narrative is running full steam ahead . Late-night comics are in pig heaven .
But Obama isn ’ t helpless . There are measures he can take right now to boost his cause , including these :
Staff changes . Political analysts are divided on whether Obama still needs to fire someone . Seven weeks after HealthCare.gov ’ s troubled launch , the moment for that may have passed . But there ’ s agreement that bringing in some new faces – and breaking up the White House ’ s image for being insular –would help him make a fresh start .
“ My sense is that he has to expand the circle a bit , and bring in some gray-hairs , ” says Democratic strategist Peter Fenn . “ He has to give certain people primary responsibility for some of this stuff – there ’ s the accountability factor . ”
In fact , Mr. Fenn would like to see a series of mini “ war rooms ” in the White House to address the range of issues , including health reform , immigration , and budget negotiations .
“ The idea of bringing in a heavy hitter is always a good idea , ” says Cal Jillson , a political scientist at Southern Methodist University in Dallas .
The obvious person to have fired was Health and Human Services ( HHS ) Secretary Kathleen Sebelius , but the time has passed , says Mr. Jillson . “ It might have been unfair , but you look like you did something definitive , and that buys you a little time . ”
Former Obama White House press secretary Robert Gibbs still believes that some heads need to roll .
“ If this were to happen in the private sector , somebody would have probably already lost their job , ” Mr. Gibbs said Monday on “ The Today Show. ” “ And I think the only way to restore ultimate confidence in going forward , is to make sure that whoever was in charge of this , isn ’ t in charge of the long-term health care plan . ”
The list of possible eminences to ride herd on Obamacare is long , starting with three former Clinton chiefs of staff – John Podesta , Erskine Bowles , and Leon Panetta ( who has already served Obama as CIA director and Defense secretary ) . There ’ s also former Senate majority leader Tom Daschle , who was Obama ’ s original choice to run HHS , before some unpaid taxes came to light .
Lower expectations . The White House and HHS have already started doing this by saying that HealthCare.gov will work for 80 percent of customers by Nov. 30 . That ’ s the Obama administration ’ s definition of “ vast majority , ” which was the original promise for functionality by Jeffrey Zients , the management expert brought in on Oct. 25 to oversee the site ’ s repairs .
Maybe now HHS should drop the “ vast majority ” part and stick with 80 percent . At the White House briefing Monday , press secretary Jay Carney broke down the remaining 20 percent into three groups : those who will still encounter technical problems ; those who are uncomfortable using a computer to buy insurance ; and those with complicated family situations who can not determine their eligibility for a subsidy on the website .
Focus on other issues . Obamacare may be the president ’ s signature policy initiative , but he has plenty of other issues on his plate . Job creation is one , with unemployment still high at 7.3 percent . Immigration reform is another , and while prospects are slim , there ’ s no down side in looking eager to move while painting Republicans as uncooperative .
Then there ’ s the budget . Conferees face a Dec. 13 deadline to come up with a deal , including a long-term blueprint ; government funding runs out on Jan. 15 , at which point there could be another shutdown . Republican leaders have offered assurances that won ’ t happen , but nothing is certain in polarized Washington .
Obama has , in fact , been doing events centered on issues other than health reform . On Oct. 24 , he did an immigration reform event at the White House . On Nov. 8 , he traveled to the port of New Orleans to focus on exports . He spoke about manufacturing at a steel plant in Cleveland on Nov. 14 . During a Nov. 6 trip to Dallas , the focus was health care – but as much on pressuring Texas to expand Medicaid as on encouraging people to shop for insurance on HealthCare.gov .
Even if the national media are focused single-mindedly on the Obamacare mess , teeing up other topics can ’ t hurt . At least Obama can ’ t be accused of hunkering down at the White House .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
In the meantime , the Obama administration is “ just going to have to slog it through and fix the website , ” says Gibbs , Obama ’ s former press secretary .
That , in turn , could help solve the problem of angry people with cancellation letters . Once HealthCare.gov is fixed , people may discover they can get a better deal in the marketplace .