The chief executive of one of the country ’ s largest health insurance companies says he is open to having a single-payer debate .
“ Single-payer , I think we should have that debate as a nation , ” Aetna chief executive Mark Bertolini said Thursday .
Bertolini spoke to a private meeting where Aetna employees could ask questions of their chief executive . A partial video of his remarks provided to ███ includes Bertolini responding to a question about single-payer health care .
“ In the news media , it is reporting that the Republican health plan is paving the way to a single-payer system , ” an Aetna employee asks Bertolini . “ What are your thoughts on that , and how would it impact Aetna ? ”
Single-payer , I think we should have that debate as a nation . But let me remind everybody that Aetna was the first financial intermediary for Medicare . We cut the first check for Medicare in 1965 to Hartford Hospital for $ 517.57 . The government doesn ’ t administer anything . the first thing they ’ ve ever tried to administer in social programs was the ACA , and that didn ’ t go so well . So the industry has always been the back room for government . If the government wants to pay all the bills , and employers want to stop offering coverage , and we can be there in a public private partnership to do the work we do today with Medicare , and with Medicaid at every state level , we run the Medicaid programs for them , then let ’ s have that conversation . But if we want to turn it all over to the government to run , is the government really the right place to run all this stuff ? And that ’ s the debate that needs to be had . They could finance it , and if there is one financer , and you could call that single-payer . ... We ’ re going to pay for it one way or another . What we have to do is we have to get the costs right . We have to get people healthy . It ’ s not about who is paying the bill . It ’ s about what we ’ re doing to get the costs down . The Democrats are now saying that with the new Republican bill , wait there is nothing in here about getting costs down . That ’ s the point . And so that ’ s the place we ’ re headed as a company . It ’ s not just about paying the bills .
What Bertolini seems open to is a version of single-payer where the federal government would contract out certain functions private companies , such as Aetna . These insurers would , in his own words , become a “ back room for government . ”
Aetna spokesperson T.J. Crawford said that Bertolini was not “ advocating ” for a single-payer system .
“ Mark was certainly not advocating for a single-payer system , but instead encouraging debate while pointing out that public-private partnerships have been the backbone of the more successful government health care programs ( examples include administering Medicare Advantage or Medicaid managed care ) , ” he said in an emailed statement . “ In other words , partnering works when done the right way . ”