WASHINGTON — President Trump suggested Friday that Senate Republicans may not be able to push through their health care plan meant to repeal and replace Obamacare and suggested a conservative-endorsed alternative instead .
The president tweeted , `` If Republican Senators are unable to pass what they are working on now , they should immediately REPEAL , and then REPLACE at a later date ! ''
If Republican Senators are unable to pass what they are working on now , they should immediately REPEAL , and then REPLACE at a later date ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 30 , 2017
It 's the second time this week that Trump seemed to recognize how difficult it may be to get this bill through the Senate . On Monday , he said on Twitter , `` Republican Senators are working very hard to get there , with no help from the Democrats . Not easy ! Perhaps just let OCare crash & burn ! ''
A day later , as Republican opposition to the legislation grew , Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky announced that he would postpone a vote on the legislation until after the July Fourth recess .
McConnell needs at minimum 50 of the 52 Republicans in the Senate to vote for the bill . Currently , there are at least eight senators outright opposed to the legislation and a handful of others who have expressed concern .
Still , White House deputy press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said the tweet did not represent a change in Trump ’ s position .
“ We 're still fully committed to pushing through with the Senate at this point , but we ’ re looking at every possible option for repealing and replacing Obamacare , ” she said .
Sen. Ben Sasse , R-Neb . — a frequent Trump critic and someone who has stayed relatively quiet on the health care debate so far — said Friday on Fox News that he agreed with the president on repealing now and replacing later .
`` If we do n't get this resolved by the Monday of the next week , July 10 , if there is n't a combined repeal and replace plan , I 'm writing a letter to the president this morning urging him to call on us to separate them , '' Sasse said .
Sasse said the Senate should repeal the health care law and then Trump should require senators to stick around during their August recess to craft a replacement . He also recommended that the repeal be delayed for a year , so lawmakers would have time to craft and put a repeal in place .
Sasse pointed out that Republican lawmakers voted overwhelmingly in the past to repeal Obamacare without a replacement . However , those votes were largely symbolic because President Obama made clear he 'd always veto any attempts to undo his signature health care law .
Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky , one of the Republican senators who has said he can not vote for the proposed legislation as it stands , agreed with the president 's Friday tweet , saying that Obamacare should be repealed immediately .
`` I have spoken to @ realDonaldTrump & Senate leadership about this and agree , '' he said on Twitter . `` Let 's keep our word to repeal then work on replacing right away . ''
I have spoken to @ realDonaldTrump & Senate leadership about this and agree . Let 's keep our word to repeal then work on replacing right away . — Senator Rand Paul ( @ RandPaul ) June 30 , 2017
But that message stands in contrast to a January conversation that Paul touted , during which the then-president-elect agreed with him on repealing and replacing the same day . It was not immediately clear if the plan was to do so in two separate but simultaneous bills or one .
I just spoke to @ realDonaldTrump and he fully supports my plan to replace Obamacare the same day we repeal it . The time to act is now . — Senator Rand Paul ( @ RandPaul ) January 7 , 2017
Conservative interest groups expressed hope in a call with reporters Friday morning about the chances of a full repeal taking place first .
`` It ’ s good to see the president joining us in terms of the full repeal effort , '' said Ken Cuccinelli , president of the Senate Conservatives Fund PAC and former attorney general of Virginia . Cuccinelli has been a strong opponent of Obamacare and has sued over the health care law .
`` It 's distressing to see so many Republicans who have lied about their commitment to repeal , '' he said .
A senior GOP aide told ███ that there are no plans underway to send a separate repeal bill to the Congressional Budget Office for analysis . The aide pointed out that the original plan had always been to repeal and replace separately , but Trump and House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis. , said that it was important to do the two simultaneously . That led to lawmakers changing course and focusing on a single bill .
David Bozell , president of the conservative advocacy group ForAmerica , dismissed information coming from leadership aides in the Senate .
`` President and Sen. Sasse kind of have their finger on the pulse a lot more than Senate leadership and their staff do , '' he told reporters .
Nathan Nascimento , vice president of policy of the Koch funding arm Freedom Partners , said the two-step approach `` would put Congress and the administration in the position to keep their promise '' on health care .
Trump 's health care tweet — along with another about crime and killings in Chicago — came as the hosts of Morning Joe , Mika Brzezinski and Joe Scarborough , addressed his Thursday Twitter attacks .