Congressional Republicans agree that the new federal health care program should be ended . But they are finding themselves bitterly divided over how .
They have tried dozens of times to repeal it . Now , some GOP lawmakers want to block all money for Obamacare in a stopgap spending bill that must be approved next month to prevent the government from shutting down on Oct. 1 . But other Republicans say that wo n't work and may well backfire .
Back home in Texas for the August recess , Republican Rep. Blake Farenthold confronted the issue at a recent open house in his Corpus Christi office .
Specifically , the second-term congressman was asked whether he would vote to defund Obamacare in the temporary measure to keep the federal government running .
The reply from Farenthold , who has had strong Tea Party backing , was just a tad hesitant : `` I 'm not sure how effective defunding will be , but I 'm going to do my best . It 's my responsibility as a member of Congress to mitigate the damage from what I think is a bad law , so if defunding is a way to do that , I 'm going to vote to defund it . ''
House GOP leaders fear Republicans would take the blame if that leads to a government shutdown . But defunding advocates say public opinion is on their side .
On Wednesday , the conservative group Heritage Action released a poll conducted in 10 Republican-leaning districts . Heritage 's Michael Needham said it showed that nearly three-fifths of those surveyed approve of a shutdown , which was described in the poll 's question as `` a temporary slowdown in non-essential federal government operations . ''
`` What the voters are demanding , what they 've been demanding for years , is political courage , '' said Needham . `` And that 's been lacking in Washington , D.C. , and I think that we 've been very pleased with what we 've seen at the town halls . ''
Indeed , earlier this month , at the same Kentucky church picnic where Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell launched his re-election campaign , Tea Party-backed challenger Matt Bevin chided McConnell for not signing a letter that 13 other GOP senators have signed that promises to defund Obamacare in the stopgap spending bill .
`` We hear a lot of empty rhetoric from Mitch McConnell about ending Obamacare , '' Bevin said . `` Obamacare is unpopular . Stop talking about yanking it out root and branch , and start voting in the U.S. Senate to kill it by defunding it . Stand with Sen. Mike Lee [ the Utah Republican leading the defunding charge ] — be a man , stand up and put your money where your mouth is . ''
But veteran Kentucky political analyst Al Cross predicted that the letter pledging to defund Obamacare would not get McConnell 's signature .
`` I ca n't see him signing onto that because he surely believes , as most Republicans do , that would be political suicide to shut down the government , '' Cross said . `` But he 's got to find a way to finesse that . ''
After weeks of dodging questions about where he stood on defunding Obamacare , McConnell did tell WYMT-TV in Corbin , Ky. , on Tuesday that using a big spending bill to defund the program was not the way to go .
`` The problem is , the bill that would shut down the government would n't shut down Obamacare , '' he said . `` Most of it is permanent law and not affected by that . ''
That puts McConnell at odds with the Tea Party-aligned senators behind the defunding pledge letter , including Texas Republican and presidential hopeful Ted Cruz .
`` They say this is a fool 's errand — you 're tilting at windmills , '' Cruz told a crowd of conservative religious activists in Ames , Iowa , last weekend . `` Let me tell you , if we can hold 41 Republicans in the U.S. Senate , or 218 Republicans in the U.S. House , we can defund Obamacare . ''
Cruz spoke the day after President Obama roundly rejected any effort to defund the law , which has been his signature domestic accomplishment .
`` The idea that you would shut down the government unless you prevent 30 million people from getting health care is a bad idea , '' Obama said Friday .
But Republicans who endorse defunding insist it wo n't be their fault if the government does shut down .
`` The way I see it , '' said Florida Sen. Marco Rubio , another presidential hopeful , on the Senate floor last month , `` is if we pass a budget that pays for everything except for Obamacare , and the president says he 'll veto that , it is he who wants to shut down the government . ''
And that makes Heritage Action 's Needham confident that the list of senators signing the defunding letter will only lengthen .
`` Our expectation is that when people come back in September , they 'll be rushing to get on that letter , '' he said .
But one who likely wo n't be is McConnell , the Senate 's Republican leader .