It 's the first test of support on Capitol Hill since the health law ’ s disastrous rollout . House passes ACA fix
Thirty-nine House Democrats on Friday broke ranks to support a Republican bill that would allow health insurers to continue selling plans canceled under Obamacare through 2014 , the first test of support on Capitol Hill since the law ’ s disastrous rollout .
The House voted , 261-157 , to pass the bill by Rep. Fred Upton ( R-Mich. ) . It ’ s a significant show of disloyalty to the White House , but House Democrats had expected the defections to be far higher before the Obama administration said Thursday that it would pursue an administrative fix to the cancellation problem .
Obama ’ s White House vowed to veto the bill , saying it “ threatens the health security of hard working , middle class families. ” The bill is headed nowhere in the Democratic-led Senate , where a number of Senate Democrats have also proposed their own changes to the health care law .
( IN 90 SECONDS : Obamacare puts Democrats ’ credibility on the line )
Four Republicans opposed the bill — Reps. Jim Bridenstine of Oklahoma , Paul Broun of Georgia , Ralph Hall of Texas and Thomas Massie of Kentucky . Some conservatives had feared the bill could be viewed as making Obamacare “ better . ”
The Democratic defections largely came from members from the most moderate districts , including Reps. Bruce Braley of Iowa , Ron Kind of Wisconsin , Ami Bera of California , Nick Rahall of West Virginia . Also voting in support was Rep. Patrick Murphy of Florida , where the local Blue Cross plan got significant attention for sending out 300,000 cancellation notices .
But other Democrats voted for the bill , too , including Reps. Peter DeFazio of Oregon and John Garamendi of California .
Democrats had feared mass defections earlier in the week , but Obama ’ s mea culpa speech on Thursday — along with persuasion from White House officials who came to the Hill to meet with House and Senate Democrats — stanched the blow somewhat .
In a further attempt to limit the Democratic support for a Republican bill , House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) held two meetings with her caucus in recent days with top administration officials , including the president ’ s chief of staff , Denis McDonough .
Still , the vote lured several politically vulnerable House Democrats over to the Republican side , as the health care law became a major focal point in their reelection campaigns next year . Rep. Ron Barber ( D-Ariz. ) , a top target of House Republicans , said he supported the Upton bill because this part of the health law didn ’ t “ work . ”
“ It ’ s a huge bill , over 2,000 pages , there are going to be unintended consequences , there are going to be things that don ’ t work , ” Barber said Friday of the health care law . “ And I ’ m about fixing things that don ’ t work . I don ’ t want to see us throw the baby out with the bathwater , which is what some people recommend . ”
Before the administrative repair was announced , upwards of 100 House Democrats had threatened to support the Upton bill because they were worried about campaign ads against them on the president ’ s broken promise that consumers would be able to keep their insurance plans under Obamacare .
Upton , speaking on CNN Friday , said the thinks his bill — and the potential for Democratic support — spurred the White House ’ s administrative fix .
“ Until they saw that we were going to have some 300 votes a couple days ago , they were just going to sit on their hands , ” Upton told CNN on Friday . “ That finally prompted the White House yesterday afternoon to announce this administrative change that they ’ re trying to do . ”
“ But until then , they were willing , ready and willing to let literally millions of folks who were going the lose their individual policies … go over the edge , ” he added .