A sick child is wrenching for the parents , but policy answers are not so simple .
On Monday , late-night-TV comedian Jimmy Kimmel delivered an emotional monologue about his newborn son . His baby was born with a congenital heart defect that required emergency open-heart surgery .
Millions of American parents , myself included , have walked in Kimmel ’ s shoes . We ’ ve experienced the terrifying roller coaster of emotions — panic , helplessness , anger , anxiety , relief , grief , and unconditional love — that comes with raising chronically ill kids .
But Kimmel didn ’ t use his high-profile platform to educate the public about coping with rare diseases . Or to champion the nation ’ s best and brightest pediatric specialists and medical innovators . The Tinseltown celebrity turned his personal plight into a political weapon , which his liberal friends were all too happy to wield . Top Democrats tweeted their praise for Kimmel ’ s advocacy of expanded government health-care regulations :
“ Thanks @ jimmykimmel for sharing your story & reminding us what ’ s at stake w/health care , ” Hillary Clinton effused .
The Huffington Post piled on : “ Jimmy Kimmel ’ s Humanity Underscores Heartlessness Of GOP ’ s Approach To The Poor . ”
I don ’ t need lectures from Huffington Post and Hollywood elites about having a heart . Neither do the rest of America ’ s parents , whatever their political affiliations , who know what it ’ s like to stay up night after endless night with suffering children , wondering whether they would ever be able to breathe normally again or see the light of the next day .
Kimmel doesn ’ t need more maudlin Twitter suck-uppery . He needs a healthy fact-check .
“ Before 2014 , ” he claimed , “ if you were born with congenital heart disease like my son was , there was a good chance you ’ d never be able to get health insurance because you had a pre-existing condition , you were born with a pre-existing condition . ”
This is false . If parents had health insurance , the child would have been covered under the parents ’ policy whether or not the child had a health problem .
Kimmel continued : “ And if your parents didn ’ t have medical insurance , you might not live long enough to even get denied because of a pre-existing condition . ”
The term “ pre-existing condition ” is used to describe uninsured chronically ill people who apply for insurance coverage , not for a child in need of immediate care . Moreover , in the U.S. , virtually all hospitals are legally obligated to provide emergency treatment to every patient who urgently requires emergency medical care regardless of the patient ’ s insurance status . This would include a newborn with an urgent heart condition . This requirement does not apply only to patients who enter an emergency room . It applies to all patients who set foot on a hospital ’ s property .
In the U.S. , virtually all hospitals are legally obligated to provide emergency treatment to every patient who urgently requires emergency medical care regardless of the patient ’ s insurance status .
Kimmel then dramatically asserted : “ If your baby is going to die , and it doesn ’ t have to , it shouldn ’ t matter how much money you make . ”
I repeat : It does not matter if you are rich are poor or if you are uninsured . If your baby is in the hospital , he or she will receive emergency care no matter what .
“ This isn ’ t football , ” Kimmel implored . “ There are no teams . We are the team , it ’ s the United States . Don ’ t let their partisan squabbles divide us on something every decent person wants . ”
Kimmel implies that opposition to Obamacare-style insurance mandates is both un-American and indecent . Had he been less hysterical , he would have acknowledged that different health-care systems have pros and cons — and decent Americans can have legitimate differences of opinion on such matters .
In the land of make-believe , it would be wonderful if everyone had free access to the same high-quality care Kimmel and his family did at Cedars-Sinai and Children ’ s Hospital Los Angeles .
In the real world , Obamacare plans have severely curtailed the number of doctors and hospitals that customers can use . Command-and-control regulations on guaranteed issue , community rating , and pre-existing conditions favored by Kimmel and company are driving up costs for everyone . Limited access to specialists and long waits have become the increasing norm — just like that other model of government-run health care , the Veterans Affairs system , where the despicable practice of “ death by queuing ” spiked under Obama .
Moving toward a nationalized health system might play well with an emotion-driven late-night comedy audience . But sober observers know it would mean undermining America ’ s superior access to cutting-edge diagnosis , innovative treatment , top specialists and surgeons , technology , and drugs .
Compassion without clear thinking is just a waste of Kleenex .