CLOSE Sen. Mitch McConnell slams the Democrats ' efforts to preserve Obamacare during the Hardin County GOP 's Lincoln Day Dinner . Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier-Journal/███ Network
LOUISVILLE — Although his conservative comrades in the Senate are still butting heads over a controversial health care bill , Sen. Mitch McConnell of Kentucky was optimistic about the potential for compromise Friday evening .
President Trump tweeted Friday that congressional Republicans should consider repealing the Affordable Care Act — popularly known as Obamacare — first and then work on a replacement . Kentucky 's other Republican senator , Rand Paul , has expressed support for that idea .
But McConnell told reporters Friday that he and his colleagues in the Senate will stick to working on their current health care bill , which would repeal and replace the ACA simultaneously .
Speaking to a friendly crowd in Elizabethtown during a fundraiser for the Republican Party of Hardin County , McConnell compared his current predicament to holding a Rubik ’ s cube .
The Senate majority leader said he ’ s “ trying to figure out how to twist the dials ” to get enough votes to pass this proposal , which is expected to slash hundreds of billions of dollars from Medicaid over time and reduce some of the taxes paid by wealthy Americans .
Rolling back the ACA was a signature issue for Republicans during last year 's election , and some conservative lawmakers have suggested shortening or eliminating Congress ’ s recess in August so they ’ ll have more time to work on that as well as other priorities .
McConnell didn ’ t offer a definitive opinion about that idea Friday evening . Instead , he said , “ We ’ ll see what we need to do . ”
During his speech to a roomful of Hardin County Republicans on Friday , McConnell said he is confident that comprehensive tax reform — another key goal for the GOP — will happen .
Despite the deep divisions between Republicans and Democrats , McConnell said he sees infrastructure as an area where their interests may intersect . But Democrats are n't interested in comprehensive tax reform , he said . Instead , they 'd prefer `` raising taxes on people who are productive . ''
CLOSE Sen. Mitch McConnell said wrestling with an Obamacare repeal is like working with a Rubik 's Cube during the Hardin County GOP 's Lincoln Day Dinner . Sam Upshaw Jr./Courier-Journal/███ Network
America is a land of second opportunities , he said . There are only two ways to fail in this country : Give up or die .
“ Do we want it to be a country in which risk-taking is applauded and failure is possible ? Yes , ” he said . “ Failure has to be possible or you can ’ t have success . ”
As McConnell spoke at the Historic State Theater in Elizabethtown on Friday evening , a small but passionate group of people concerned about the future of health care in America gathered across the street .
Approximately 85 people stood together , chanting and waving anti-McConnell signs as passers-by occasionally honked their horns in solidarity or yelled `` Trump '' as they drove by .
Abbey Sorrells , 22 , of Elizabethtown , who works at a rape crisis center , said she came to the rally with some friends who are part of a group called the Heartland Progressive Alliance .
“ I just feel like the health care bill ’ s really for the 1 % , ” she said .
Audrey Morrison , 68 , of Louisville drove down to Elizabethtown to join her daughter , who interns for Planned Parenthood .
“ I hope that we persist , ” she said , because the Republican plan to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act isn ’ t a done deal yet .
Morrison said she didn ’ t expect the rally to change McConnell ’ s mind .
“ I think he ’ s been bought and sold . I don ’ t think anything ’ s going to make a difference to him , ” she said .
However , she still hopes Kentucky voters , who ’ ve repeatedly elected McConnell to the Senate for the past 30 years , will finally turn against him and call for change .