People getting treated for depression often have to suffer through months of trial-and-error testing of different drugs to see which of them—if any—will help . For a long time , scientists and clinicians have hoped for a biological means of diagnosing depression or predicting which patients will do better on a given treatment . A new study takes a step toward the latter kind of prediction by finding a distinctive signature with the noninvasive technique of electroencephalography ( EEG ) to test who will benefit from one common antidepressant .
The study , published Monday in Nature Biotechnology , followed more than 300 people with depression as they began taking the drug sertraline ( Zoloft ) or a placebo . A computer algorithm could discern the EEGs of those who fared well on the drug from those who did not . Trained on one group , the algorithm also effectively predicted results in several others .
The work is preliminary and needs to be confirmed with further studies and expanded to include other treatments , such as different antidepressants , transcranial magnetic stimulation and psychotherapy . But “ in my field , this , itself , is a huge step . We have not had the kind of predictors that are specific for a drug , ” says Madhukar Trivedi , a psychiatrist at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center ’ s Peter O ’ Donnell Jr . Brain Institute , who oversaw the multisite trial .
Right now doctors give patients whichever antidepressant they like best , and then—for all choices in this class of drugs—they have to wait six to eight weeks to know whether it is working or not , says Amit Etkin , who also oversaw the research . If the drug does not work well , it might be another six weeks before they know whether a different dose or a new drug is more effective . Meanwhile many of the people who seek medication are at risk for suicide or too depressed to function normally .
“ This very idea that we ’ ve accepted , as a field , as a world , that it takes eight weeks or more to see an antidepressant response , and that that ’ s okay—that should never be okay , ” says Etkin , who is currently on leave from Stanford University to pursue commercialization of an EEG-based diagnostic . “ We should be apologizing all the time about that , not accepting it. ” One in eight Americans currently takes an antidepressant , so improving the process of matching a patient to a medication could benefit a huge number of people , he says .
Tom Insel , former head of the National Institute of Mental Health and now an entrepreneur , thinks this approach—if proved through more research—could be extremely helpful for patients and doctors . “ This is a real step forward . It ’ s an important moment to say , ‘ Yes , we can indeed do better , ’ ” says Insel , who was not involved in the new paper but was head of NIMH when it decided to fund the research . “ If we could save these people a six-week trial on sertraline , that would save time and money and get better outcomes . ”
Today about 40 percent of patients will respond to the first drug they are given , Etkin says . In his study , about 65 percent of patients ’ whose EEG signature suggested they would respond well to sertraline did so . Even if the approach does not improve , as Etkin hopes it will , it is still substantially superior to the current method , he says .
Today ’ s psychiatric drugs do not work better than a placebo for many people , which has given them the reputation of being ineffective . But the problem may be the diagnosis , not the drug , Etkin says . Maybe the current way we diagnose is imprecise , because it is not tied to the biology of the condition . “ It ’ s all subjective report , ” he says . If scientists could diagnose based on a biological marker , diagnoses would become more objective , and the same therapies would seem more effective because they would be better matched to patients who would benefit from them . An EEG has a lot of advantages as a diagnostic , Etkin says : it is relatively cheap , readily available and easy to administer .
The use of artificial intelligence is limited in a field such as mental health , where it is very challenging to get large data sets , he says . The researchers could not rely on the increasingly popular artificial intelligence technique known as deep learning , because it would require data from 100,000 patients or so to make predictions , which isn ’ t feasible in psychiatry , he says . Instead Etkin and his colleagues created a simpler algorithm to mine the richness of EEG data and take advantage of the relatively large pool of patients they did have . Earlier efforts to find a signature without using AI failed , the paper shows , and patients ’ symptoms did not help to stratify them .
EEG measures electrical activity of the brain via electrodes placed on the skull . Some patterns of activity on the left side of the organ suggested that a patient would fare better on sertraline , Trivedi says . In the study , researchers used the same algorithm to try to find a signature—the absence of the same marker—that predicts which patients will respond well to transcranial magnetic stimulation ( TMS ) , which delivers repeated magnetic pulses to areas of the brain thought to be involved in depression .
“ From a patient perspective , that is a very valuable step , ” says Martijn Arns , another author of the paper and research director of the Brainclinics Foundation in the Netherlands . “ Rather than using ’ stepped care , ’ where a patient is started on the ’ simplest ’ treatment and escalated every time [ that person ] does not respond , we can now guide someone more quickly to the right treatment that will work for [ him or her ] using a biomarker . ”
Sebastian Olbrich , an EEG researcher who was not involved in the new study , says that although he considers the paper a “ great piece of work , ” he is concerned that the researchers team did not train their algorithm on TMS before drawing their conclusions . “ They only trained it on one treatment option and then applied it to another , ” which isn ’ t appropriate , he says .
Still , Olbrich , a psychiatrist and president of the International Pharmaco EEG Society , says he is eager to see the study expanded to other depression treatments . “ If you have this for several treatment options , this is a really great step for psychiatry , ” he says .
Trivedi says he would ultimately like to develop an EEG test that could identify the signature of depression before a person suffered its symptoms . He adds that he has begun a study with about 1,200 volunteers whom he plans to follow over time . He will check in with them a few times a year to begin to develop predictive models about who will experience depression and who will recover from it .