Republican lawmakers have taken the first step to strike down a key aspect of Obamacare – a part of the law that so many conservatives considered to be government overreach .
Early Thursday morning , the House Ways and Means Committee voted to repeal tax penalties on people who do n't buy insurance , a provision also known as the individual mandate .
That penalty or mandate was a government attempt to force healthy people to buy health insurance to help bring down overall insurance rates .
`` The fatal conceit of Obamacare is that we 're just gon na make everybody by our health insurance at the federal level ; young and healthy people are going to go into the market and pay for older , sicker people , '' House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis. , told reporters during a noon press conference .
`` It 's not working , '' he argued . `` And that 's why it 's in a death spiral . ''
███ News ' David Brody and Jenna Browder took questions Thursday on the health care controversy . Watch below :
`` We are on a mission to repeal and replace Obamacare . It 's a rescue mission to save families and patients all across this country , '' said Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers , R-Wash .
The GOP legislation , known as the American Health Care Act , would end income-based subsidies the government gives people to buy coverage . Instead , it creates tax credits , based largely on age .
Tea Party Republicans oppose the replacement plan , calling it `` Obamacare 2.0 . ''
Ryan is hoping to win them over . `` This is what good , conservative health care reform looks like . It is bold and it is long overdue , and it is us fulfilling our promises , '' he said .
The pre-dawn committee vote came after 18 hours of debate .
`` The Republican bill is one of the largest transfers to wealth from working families to the richest people in our country -- Robin Hood in reverse , '' House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , told reporters during a press conference Thursday .
`` The richest 400 families in America will get a $ 7 million tax break each year , to the tune of a $ 2.8 billion break every year . It 's $ 600 billion moving from the middle -- working-class families to the richest families in our country , '' she said .
`` What this bill needs is some 'extreme vetting . ' Frankly , any vetting at all , '' said Rep. Lloyd Doggett , D-Texas .
Some of the nation 's leading health care groups are opposing the plan .