Wendy Gonzalez sits with an insurance agent from Sunshine Life and Health Advisors as she purchases insurance under the Affordable Care Act in the Mall of Americas . HEALTH CARE Experts see big price hikes for Obamacare Premiums could rise more sharply in 2016 .
The cost of Obamacare could rise for millions of Americans next year , with one insurer proposing a 50 percent hike in premiums , fueling the controversy about just how “ affordable ” the Affordable Care Act really is .
The eye-popping 50 percent hike by New Mexico insurer Blue Cross Blue Shield is an outlier , and state officials may not allow it to go through . But health insurance experts are predicting that premiums will rise more significantly in 2016 than in the first two years of Obamacare exchange coverage . In 2015 , for example , premiums increased by an average of 5.4 percent , according to PwC ’ s Health Research Institute .
The premium increases come at a tenuous time for Obamacare , which remains under fire from a Republican Congress that wants to repeal the law , while a Supreme Court ruling on federal subsidies for the health insurance looms in June as well .
“ Insurers seem to be reporting higher trend , which means they are seeing bigger increases in health care costs , ” said Larry Levitt , senior vice president for special initiatives at the Kaiser Family Foundation . “ But really what ’ s going on here is they now have data showing what the risk pool looks like . Initially in 2014 they were completely guessing about who was going to enroll and how much health care they were going to use . ”
Many plans haven ’ t yet made public their proposed rates ; Monday is the deadline for publishing and providing an explanation for rate hikes of at least 10 percent . None announced so far is as dramatic as the New Mexico plan , although a few others are also quite sharp . The Blues in Maryland and Tennessee , both with the largest market share on the exchanges in their states , are seeking increases of more than 30 percent . In Oregon , Moda Health Plan — which attracted more than 40 percent of exchange customers in 2015 , despite competing against a dozen other health plans — is seeking average rate increases of 25 percent . Other plans released to date — including some in these four states — are seeking far more modest increases .
The reasons for the rising premiums are complex . Part of it , as Levitt noted , is simply that the carriers know a lot more about the health status and health care patterns of their new customers . Part of it ’ s rising drug prices . And the planned phasing out of certain ACA programs that were designed to reduce risk for insurers who entered the untested Obamacare marketplaces , are also causing carriers to price cautiously .
In addition , those plan cancellations – and the political outcry they caused in 2013 – still plays a role . To quell the controversy , the Obama administration allowed plans that don ’ t meet the Affordable Care Act coverage requirements to remain in place through 2017 . Insurers are still dealing with the market disruption and economic fallout of competing with those noncompliant plans .
“ With this much uncertainty , you become conservative , and so you raise your rates , ” said Dr. Martin Hickey , CEO of New Mexico Health Connections , a nonprofit co-op seeded with loan dollars under the Affordable Care Act .
Seth Chandler , an expert in insurance law at the University of Houston and author of the “ ACA Death Spiral ” blog , sees another market force at play . “ Insurers played this strategy of getting customers in the door by experimenting with lower premiums than really were appropriate , and then hoped that those customers would stick , ” Chandler said . “ If they did stick , they could raise the rates. ” In the health insurance industry , customers do tend to “ stick ” to a health plan , rather than choosing a new plan , new network , and new doctors .
Affordability , already a political talking point , is a concern of consumers and advocates , who are imploring state regulators to vigorously contest price hikes that could render coverage unattainable for low-income people , even with Obamacare subsidies .
“ People are already having that sticker shock , ” said Gabriel Sanchez , executive director of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation ’ s Center for Health Policy at the University of New Mexico , who ran focus groups recently among Latinos in New Mexico .
The bottom line for participants , he said , was “ I thought this was the Affordable Care Act ?
But the large proposed increases among market leaders are sparking a new round of recriminations , and Republicans on the Hill are again pledging to undo Obamacare . Rising costs would also be likely to elevate the issue in the looming 2016 presidential contest .
“ People are paying more as a result of the Democrats ’ health care law , and they ’ re going to be paying even more next year , and the year after that , until we ’ re able to do something to stop it , ” Sen. John Barrasso ( R-Wyo . ) , chair of the Senate Republican Policy Committee , said in a floor speech before the Memorial Day recess . “ Republicans are offering real solutions that will end these destructive and expensive Obamacare side effects . ”
Hovering over the rate-setting season is the specter of the King v. Burwell lawsuit currently before the Supreme Court . A ruling is expected in late June , and defeat for the White House would mean subsidies would be eliminated in at least 34 states that use the federal health insurance exchange . That would throw the insurance markets into chaos .
Because of the King uncertainty , at least a half dozen states , including Texas , are allowing insurers to submit two sets of rates depending on which way the court rules . But for the most part the proposed 2016 rates don ’ t account for the possibility that subsidies might disappear for millions of low-income Americans .
“ How do you price for the apocalypse ? ” asks John Gorman , a consultant who works with insurers .
The ability of state regulators to fight steep rate hikes varies across the country ; a dozen states have no authority to approve or reject proposed rates . The level of scrutiny does appear to make a significant difference . In states where regulators have the authority to approve rates , final premiums saw a median drop of 2.9 percent from initial proposals in 2015 , according to a study of 25 states by PwC ’ s Health Research Institute . In states with no such authority , premiums only came down 1.3 percent from initial proposals . In Maryland , for example , regulators only allowed rate hikes roughly half as steep as initially proposed by CareFirst Blue Cross Blue Shield for 2015 .
Insurers were largely pricing in the dark during the first two years . They had very little first-hand knowledge about how sick – and expensive — their new customers would prove to be once they actually started using their coverage . Even now , health plans are working with incomplete knowledge about the emerging marketplace .
But one early indicator that insurers keep pointing to is the spiraling cost of prescription drug coverage . Pharmacy costs increased by 11 percent in 2014 , up from 2.5 percent the previous year , according to the Altarum Institute . That spike was primarily driven by expensive specialty drugs , including breakthrough treatments for hepatitis C .
“ You ’ re seeing the biggest growth as a percent of total expenses being in the pharmacy area , ” said Ken Lalime , CEO of HealthyCT , a nonprofit insurer that is seeking to increase premiums for individual plans by an average of 14 percent for 2016 . “ They ’ re growing fast . ”
But a study published this week in Health Affairs suggests that exchange customers are actually spending less on drugs than their counterparts in the employer-sponsored market . Looking at roughly 1 million individuals who signed up for coverage through the exchanges in 2014 , researchers found that they spent an average of $ 72 per month on prescriptions . By comparison , the employer-sponsored group spent $ 93 per month on pharmaceuticals — or nearly 30 percent more .
Charles Roehrig , director of Altarum ’ s Center for Sustainable Health Spending , said that suggests insurers aren ’ t attracting a disproportionately sicker , more expensive population as widely anticipated . “ This is the first real hard evidence I ’ ve seen and its points in the other direction , ” Roehrig said .
In addition , insurers are dealing with uncertainty and the phasing out of “ risk adjustment ” programs that were designed to protect companies from undue financial risk if they participated in the exchanges . The reinsurance program , which compensates health plans that end up with a disproportionately expensive population , is scheduled to disappear after 2016 . The program has already dwindled from $ 10 billion in 2014 to $ 4 billion in 2016 .
How premium increases will ultimately shake out also remains an open question . In most states , final rates won ’ t be available until the end of the summer . The political saliency of the issue will ultimately hinge on whether there is widespread anger about the increasing cost of Obamacare exchange plans .
The University of New Mexico ’ s Sanchez said the cost of premiums hasn ’ t been a major political issue in the state so far . That ’ s in part because Gov . Susana Martinez , a Republican , hasn ’ t actively resisted implementation of the health law like many of her GOP counterparts . But Sanchez thinks health insurance costs could emerge as a political factor if the final rates are close to what ’ s currently being proposed .
“ Most voters , particular in this economic climate , are pocketbook voters , ” Sanchez said . “ Their personal finances are driving their political behavior . ”