More than two-thirds of Americans hope the Supreme Court will overturn some or all of the 2010 health care law , according to a new poll conducted by The New York Times and CBS News . Just 24 percent said they hoped the court “ would keep the entire health care law in place . ”
The Supreme Court is expected to decide a challenge to the law by the end of this month .
Forty-one percent of those surveyed said the court should strike down the entire law , and another 27 percent said the justices should overturn only the individual mandate , which requires most Americans to obtain health insurance or pay a penalty .
These numbers have not changed much in recent months and appeared to be largely unaffected by the more than six hours of arguments in the Supreme Court in March .
There was greater Republican opposition to the law than Democratic support . About two-thirds of Republicans in the recent survey said the entire law should be overturned , while 43 percent of Democrats said all of the law should be upheld .
More than 70 percent of independent voters said they wanted to see some or all of the law struck down , with a majority saying they hoped to see the whole law overturned . Twenty-two percent of independents said they hoped the entire law would survive .
Responses varied by education , too . Nearly a third of respondents with a college education said they would like to see the law upheld , compared with about 20 percent of those without a college degree .
Legal scholars and political scientists are divided over whether the justices take account of public opinion in making their decisions .
In a 2010 study published in The Georgetown Law Journal , Lawrence Baum of Ohio State University and Neal Devins of the College of William & Mary concluded that the justices were not much concerned with mass opinion .
“ Supreme Court justices care more about the views of academics , journalists and other elites than they do about public opinion , ” they wrote . “ This is true of nearly all justices and is especially true of swing justices , who often cast the critical votes in the court ’ s most visible decisions . ”
The nationwide poll is based on telephone interviews conducted May 31 through June 3 on land-lines and cellphones with 976 adults , and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points .