Betrayal is hard to take , whether in our personal lives or in the political life of the nation . Yet there are people in Washington -- too often , Republicans -- who start living in the Beltway atmosphere , and start forgetting those hundreds of millions of Americans beyond the Beltway who trusted them to do right by them , to use their wisdom instead of their cleverness .
President Bush 41 epitomized these betrayals when he broke his `` read my lips , no new taxes '' pledge . He paid the price when he quickly went from high approval ratings as president to someone defeated for reelection by a little known governor from Arkansas .
Chief Justice John Roberts need fear no such fate because he has lifetime tenure on the Supreme Court . But conscience can be a more implacable and inescapable punisher -- and should be .
The Chief Justice probably made as good a case as could be made for upholding the constitutionality of ObamaCare by defining one of its key features as a `` tax . ''
The legislation did n't call it a tax and Chief Justice Roberts admitted that this might not be the most `` natural '' reading of the law . But he fell back on the long-standing principle of judicial interpretation that the courts should not declare a law unconstitutional if it can be reasonably read in a way that would make it constitutional , out of `` deference '' to the legislative branch of government .
But this question , like so many questions in life , is a matter of degree . How far do you bend over backwards to avoid the obvious , that ObamaCare was an unprecedented extension of federal power over the lives of 300 million Americans today and of generations yet unborn ?
These are the people that Chief Justice Roberts betrayed when he declared constitutional something that is nowhere authorized in the Constitution of the United States .
John Roberts is no doubt a brainy man , and that seems to carry a lot of weight among the intelligentsia -- despite glaring lessons from history , showing very brainy men creating everything from absurdities to catastrophes . Few of the great tragedies of history were created by the village idiot , and many by the village genius .
One of the Chief Justice 's admirers said that when others are playing checkers , he is playing chess . How much consolation that will be as a footnote to the story of the decline of individual freedom in America , and the wrecking of the best medical care in the world , is another story .
There are many speculations as to why Chief Justice Roberts did what he did , some attributing noble and far-sighted reasons , and others attributing petty and short-sighted reasons , including personal vanity . But all of that is ultimately irrelevant .
What he did was betray his oath to be faithful to the Constitution of the United States .
Who he betrayed were the hundreds of millions of Americans -- past , present and future -- whole generations in the past who have fought and died for a freedom that he has put in jeopardy , in a moment of intellectual inspiration and moral forgetfulness , 300 million Americans today whose lives are to be regimented by Washington bureaucrats , and generations yet unborn who may never know the individual freedoms that their ancestors took for granted .
Some claim that Chief Justice Roberts did what he did to save the Supreme Court as an institution from the wrath -- and retaliation -- of those in Congress who have been railing against Justices who invalidate the laws they have passed . Many in the media and in academia have joined the shrill chorus of those who claim that the Supreme Court does not show proper `` deference '' to the legislative branch of government .
But what does the Bill of Rights seek to protect the ordinary citizen from ? The government ! To defer to those who expand government power beyond its constitutional limits is to betray those whose freedom depends on the Bill of Rights .
Similar reasoning was used back in the 1970s to justify the Federal Reserve 's inflationary policies . Otherwise , it was said , Congress would destroy the Fed 's independence , as it can also change the courts ' jurisdiction . But is it better for an institution to undermine its own independence , and freedom along with it , while forfeiting the trust of the people in the process ?