As the debate proceeds over what should succeed the Affordable Care Act ( Obamacare ) , here are a few basic ideas to keep in mind .
We live in a world of scarcity , which is to say that at any moment our ends surpass the available means to achieve them . We ca n't have everything now . Thus we have to choose among alternatives . It is obvious that the human race has pushed back the limits of scarcity , but that is the result of human ingenuity sufficiently free to solve problems , or what Julian Simon called `` the ultimate resource . '' Nevertheless , right now we can not have all we want , so we have to make choices . A quantity of a resource or a unit of labor services can not be put to more than one purpose at a time . Making choices entails opportunity costs—the benefit we forgo by choosing alternative A over alternative B instead .
Despite the popular misconception , health care is not beyond economic law ; it is not a free good that falls like manna from heaven . It has to be produced , which means people must mix their scarce labor with scarce resources to produce the things used to perform the medical services we want . It would be foolish to expect them to donate their labor and resources because other people need them . They have their own lives to live and livelihoods to earn . It would be wrong to compel them . They are not slaves .
In other words , no one can have a right to medical care or insurance , that is , to the labor services and resources of other people—including the taxpayers . We hear a great deal about the need to respect all people ; well , respecting people must include respecting their liberty and justly acquired possessions . Without that , `` respect '' is hollow .
Politicians , of course , can declare a right to medical care , but those are mere words . What counts is what happens after the declaration . Since a system in which everyone could have , on demand , all the medical care they wanted at no cost would be unsustainable , the so-called right to medical care necessarily translates into the power of politicians and bureaucrats to set the terms under which medical services and products may be provided and received . This is crucial : a government-declared `` right '' ( that does not reflect natural rights ) is no right at all ; it is rather a declared government power to allocate goods and services .
Natural rights—which boil down to the single right not to be aggressed against—require only that one abstain from aggression . Thus all can exercise their rights at once without conflict . On the other hand , government-invented `` rights '' —such as the right to medical care— can not be exercised at the same time ; the potential for conflict is built in . For example , a person can not use his own money as he wishes if the government health care system takes it by force through taxation to pay for other people 's services .
Since we live in a condition of scarcity we need a way to determine what gets produced in what quantities and how . We obviously want the most value ( in the eyes of consumers ) for the least cost . That way , we have resources left over for other things we want . How can we achieve that ?
Two ways exist for determining how resources and labor are to be used ; an apparent third way is simply a mixture of the other two . The first is for the government—fallible , corruptible politicians and bureaucrats operating a monopoly—to decide for everyone . The other way is the decentralized , competitive marketplace . The so-called third way is for politicians and bureaucrats to interfere with , but not completely incapacitate , the marketplace . Only one is sure to produce the most of what people want for less , that is , to raise living standards as high as people wish .
The government solution has a fatal practical flaw : politicians and bureaucrats will not be able to arrange resources and labor services in such a way as to best serve the welfare of everyone—assuming that 's what they sincerely want to do . ( If they only want to serve themselves we have a different problem . ) Why wo n't they be able to do this ? Because , as Ludwig von Mises and F. A. Hayek showed , the people running the system wo n't know what they would need to know ; the critical information about the supply of resources and the subjective preferences for goods and services is simply unavailable : it does not exist as data in any one place in complete form , and much of it is not articulable at all . The rulers would have to make guesses , and their errors would be society-wide and potentially catastrophic . Attempts at central economic planning have always ended in disaster and misery .
The market method of deciding what is produced solves this complex problem . How ? Through the price system . When people are free to trade goods and services in the market , they generate prices that inform others ( even if anyone is aware of this ) about the relative supply of and demand for things . Those prices then guide producers and consumers . While their objective is not to create a grand and complex process that encourages the coordination countless plans , economizes on resources and labor , and enables people to achieve their well-being in an unrivaled manner , that is in effect what they do . This is what Adam Smith meant with his `` invisible hand '' trope . Prices guide people to do `` the right thing . ''
While rulers have never restrained themselves from interfering with people 's peaceful transactions , history demonstrates rather clearly that to the extent they do so , the people without political power tend to prosper . The link between consensual market activity and general prosperity stands out starkly .
Note that for markets to work fully , all people must be free to control their lives , their labor , and their justly acquired possessions , that is , their property . This brings us to a key point in favor of markets : the moral advantage . Control of economic activity by bureaucrats necessarily treats people like property . Planning an economy means nothing less than planning other people 's lives . There is no `` economy '' ; there are only people who exchange their money , goods , and labor with one another for mutual benefit . The economy is typically spoken of as though it were a machine that needs tending . It is not . We are the economy our rulers wish to regulate , regiment , and plan .
A keystone of markets , when politicians and bureaucrats leave them alone , is competition . Competition is much-lauded but regularly undermined by alliances of government officials and businesspeople seeking higher profits than purely voluntary transactions would bestow . Virtually all government interference with market activity has the effect of stifling competition . Big companies , for example , can more easily carry the burdens of high taxes and bureaucratic rules than can small or yet-to-be-founded businesses . Government is the source of the much-despised economic concentration .
Stifling competition by force harms society because through competition we learn things we would not otherwise learn . Hayek called it a `` discovery procedure . '' I think of it as the universal solvent because it dissolves problems by dispelling ignorance . At any time there are things we do n't know that we 'd be better off knowing . We ca n't hope to learn those things through the decision making of a small group of bureaucrats , even if they try in good faith to puzzle things out . But when people are free to buy and sell freely in the market—confronting real-world alternatives—they hit on solutions to their problems . It 's trial and error , but there is no better way because virtually all people participate and through their actions contribute their bits of knowledge , any one of which might lead to just the solution people are looking for . Competition and cooperation are two sides of the same coin , and the cooperative nature of markets ought to make them attractive to folks who are now hostile to them .
This is where the entrepreneur comes in . While in a real sense everyone is an entrepreneur ( acting creatively in an uncertain , open-ended world ) , professional entrepreneurs earn their livelihoods by taking risks in offering novel goods and services to improve people 's lives . If their offerings are valued by others , they profit . If not , they lose . The quest for profit and the aversion to loss create unparalleled incentives to serve others effectively . Those who consistently misread consumer preferences and thereby waste resources ( from the consumers ' viewpoint ) will lose so often they will have to find other work , leaving the field to those who are more attuned to consumers ' subjective preferences . The only thing that can scuttle this process is the government ( plus the privilege-seeking businesspeople it gives rise to ) , which is able to bail out producers who ill-serve consumers and waste resources .
Competition , it is important to realize , does not simply mean that several companies offer the same product or service . It is a creative function driven by entrepreneurs who take risks in an uncertain world to provide things we 'll find valuable . If we are to reap the benefits of market competition , people must be free to improvise without having to obtain permission from a bureaucracy . Note the application to the health care industry : contrary to what politicians and bureaucrats would have you believe , a few insurance companies selling identical policies designed by a government agency is not market competition .
This brings us to an important question in the health care context : what is insurance ? Outside the medical sector most people understand that insurance is a way to grapple with uncertainty . Specifically , insurance allows the pooling of resources of many people in order to deal with the small risk of a large financial misfortune for any particular individual in the group . Think of life , homeowner , or auto insurance . For some ███ health insurance is thought of differently . Most people expect health insurance to cover every medical expenditure no matter how small , predictable services ( like annual physical exams ) , and illnesses contracted before the coverage began ( `` preexisting illnesses '' ) . Much of the ███ for this goes back to World War II , when the government imposed wage and price controls but let employers offer medical insurance as noncash compensation not subject to income taxation . One of the problems with American health care is that most people get their insurance through their employers , anesthetizing consumers to the true costs of coverage and services . Medical transactions are largely between large institutions ( including the government ) , not cost-conscious buyers and customer-oriented practitioners .
Much of what we call health insurance is not really insurance . No one expects their auto policy to cover windshield-wiper blades , tires , and oil changes ( such a policy would n't be worth the price ) , and no one expects to be able to buy a homeowners policy to cover a house fire already in progress or a life-insurance policy for someone who is already dead . Logically , you can not insure against a certainty . Someone who has a serious illness before obtaining health coverage represents medical expenses sure to be incurred . Call the coverage what you will , but it is not insurance . The government can force others—even insurance companies—to pay for those things , but that does n't make it insurance . It 's welfare , with the companies playing the role of tax collectors . In the process , the insurance market is distorted and the true costs of the implicit transfer of resources are hidden . ( I explore this point here . )
Violating economic laws has consequences—even in the health care industry . If the government requires insurance companies to cover already-sick people , they must get the money somewhere . The natural place to look is to younger , healthier people , that is , people who will pay more than they collect . But here come the problems . If insurers charge those people too much , they wo n't buy policies ( knowing that they can buy them when they get sick ) and insurers will have to charge older , sicker people enough to cover the costs of their medical care . ( That would expose the fact that it is not insurance , but merely a pre-payment plan . ) If politicians prohibit insurers from charging older , sicker people more ( or much more ) than younger , healthier people , the higher level of premiums would drive more of the latter out of the market , making things worse . The ACA attempted to solve this problem by forcing everyone to buy a policy—that is , by violating their liberty . However , many young people preferred to pay the tax penalty for not having coverage rather than buy a policy . That is one ███ insurers are fleeing the market and the ACA is sinking .
The lesson is that tampering with the price system always comes to grief . Medical care and insurance are not exceptions . If prices are to do their job , they must be true—that is , undistorted by government controls and mandates . If the government passes rules to expand insurance in order to minimize or eliminate out-pocket-expenses for routine medical services , it makes those services to appear free or near-free to consumers ; those misleading price signals then lead to problems that politicians will then act to solve . By overconsuming `` free '' services—say , by undergoing unnecessary elective tests because `` my insurance covers it '' —people quite innocently impose costs on insurers ( that will have to be recouped from customers ) and other people : premiums and waiting times for services will rise . It 's supply and demand .
Politicians may believe they can help by giving tax-financed subsidies to policyholders and insurers , but that policy brings its own problems . For one thing , regulations will follow to keep the subsidies ( now an `` entitlement '' ) from exploding out of control . People may not like the conditions , but as the Supreme Court said in the 1941 Wickard v. Filburn case , `` It is hardly lack of due process for the Government to regulate that which it subsidizes . ''
This raises an important matter : if the government assumes responsibility , directly and indirectly , for the cost of medical care to society , inevitably it will find it necessary to restrict or ration services . That is , it wo n't allow us to make our own choices because it will have a political and fiscal stake in `` bending the cost curve down . '' As Mises noted long ago , intervention begets intervention . ( In this article I debunk the proposition that markets are just another way to ration goods and services . )
Advocates of a government-directed medical system may have the best intentions , but intentions ca n't override market forces , which are generated by purposeful human action . Moreover , we have no ███ for confidence that politicians and bureaucrats will sufficiently distinguish the public 's interest ( if that can be defined beyond peoples ' individual interests ) from their own interests . Government officials are no less devoted to their careers and prestige than people outside the government ; indeed , power is what may have attracted many to government `` service . '' We must not compare the real-world market to the idealized state , because in reality , state operatives lack both the information and incentives needed to deliver the goods .
Summing up : Health care is a collection of important services , but that does not mean the laws of economics can be flouted without bad consequences . We know that competition works , even in the health care industry : in recent years LASIK eye surgery and cosmetic surgery , which are typically elective procedures not covered by insurance , have gone down in price and up in quality . This demonstrates what happens with consumers are cost-conscious ( even when competition is hampered ) .
Governments at all levels have created the problems that politicians and their consultants tell us only they can solve by force . Intervention stimulates demand by distorting prices and restricts supply by , among other ways , limiting the number of insurers and practitioners through occupational licensing and permitting , capping the number of hospitals and medical schools through accreditation , and making drugs and devices more expensive through the Food and Drug Administration 's bureaucratic rules and , importantly , patents . The system is riddled with government-sponsored cartels . ( For more on this see Kevin Carson 's `` Health Care and Radical Monopoly . '' )
Moreover , government limits access to health care in the myriad ways it impedes people 's general pursuit of financial success : state intervention lowers incomes compared to a freed economy and raises the prices of many goods by increasing scarcity and distorting production—that is , it stymies growth in living standards .
If universal access to medical care is the goal , the government is the goalie . It should get out of the way .