Consumer advocates complained that this was the wrong message to send because it incorrectly implied that no action was required and that nothing was changing , and administration officials have responded .
“ We will encourage everyone to come back to the marketplace to update their eligibility information and shop for the best coverage option that meets their needs , ” Andrew M. Slavitt , the No . 2 official at the Medicare agency , said last week .
Federal officials said they did not have the ability to compute 2015 subsidies from the income data currently available to them , which could be one or two years old . For this reason , they said , consumers should go back to the marketplace and report changes in income or family size , which could affect the amount of their subsidies .
Kaiser Permanente , the large nonprofit health plan , said in a recent letter to the administration that requiring consumers to go to an exchange to ascertain their new subsidies would “ significantly increase the administrative burdens on enrollees , marketplaces and carriers , ” and seemed to defeat the purpose of a “ passive renewal process . ”
If people update their information online , Mr. Albright said , they will be directed to the “ plan finder ” at HealthCare.gov , where they can see all the insurance options available in their area . If they like their current coverage , they can renew it by entering the 14-digit identification number for their health plan . Or they can search for the plan in the online catalog of private insurance options known as Plan Compare .
Insurers have complained to the administration that the process is much more cumbersome than the one followed by workers at private companies . “ Consumers will be frustrated and confused by having to locate their current option in Plan Compare , or by having to type a 14-digit number directly into the website , ” Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans said in a recent letter to the administration .
Tax credits are affected by the premium cost for a benchmark “ silver ” policy and could change even if a person has the same income and the same health plan next year , experts say .