McDonough has spent the past three months soothing Democratic anxieties . McDonough to Dems : We 've got this
White House officials knew that selling Obamacare to the public would be difficult , but it wasn ’ t until Sen. Max Baucus called the rollout a “ huge train wreck coming down ” that they realized they were losing a key constituency : congressional Democrats .
So White House chief of staff Denis McDonough quietly added the job of Capitol Hill confidence builder to his portfolio .
Armed with a PowerPoint presentation and a direct line to President Barack Obama , McDonough has spent the past three months soothing Democratic anxieties over the most divisive health care expansion in decades . He meets every other week with Baucus , briefs vulnerable Democrats on the administration ’ s progress and treks up to the Hill on a moment ’ s notice to visit offices unannounced .
His stepped-up role on health care is part of a congressional outreach effort that had been highly unusual for the Obama White House , which has had a dysfunctional relationship with the Hill . But with Democrats worried about both the logistics and politics of Obamacare , his intervention is viewed as necessary to protect the president ’ s signature legislative achievement .
“ They know they had a problem , ” Baucus said in an interview . “ They ’ re dealing with it very forthrightly . I feel better about it than I did before . ”
He has toured Guantánamo Bay with Sens . Dianne Feinstein ( D-Calif. ) and John McCain ( R-Ariz. ) , taken late-night calls from Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) while washing dishes at home , and dropped by Sen. Joe Manchin ’ s office for an impromptu chat with the West Virginia Democrat ’ s top aides .
He has spent time on the Hill in the past few weeks negotiating a deal on student loan rate hikes , averting a showdown over the Senate filibuster , and meeting with Republicans on a potential deficit-reduction compromise .
The West Wing is now betting that McDonough ’ s personal engagement can work again .
“ There is clearly a lot of concern among [ senators ] up for reelection next year . They were pretty clear with McDonough about that , ” said a top Senate Democrat who spoke on condition on anonymity to discuss a private meeting . “ They want to see the White House get on top of this . ”
Between McDonough and an expanded team of aides focused solely on health care , the administration has conducted more than 20 briefings since May with House and Senate lawmakers and staff , including some from Republican offices , according to the White House .
Obama is relying on Democratic lawmakers to act almost as constituent caseworkers and help enroll millions of Americans in the insurance exchanges that open Oct. 1 . But he also needs them to stick by him if a rocky rollout raises pressure on Democrats , particularly those facing voters next year , to roll back or delay elements of the law .
House Republicans continue to pass bills aimed at weakening the law , and Sen. Mike Lee ( R-Utah ) threatened this week to shut down the government by filibustering any spending bill that continued funding for Obamacare .
The Democratic-controlled Senate has thwarted the GOP ’ s repeal attempts . But the fear among ACA proponents is the efforts could gain traction among red-state Democrats in an election year and deal an embarrassing blow to the White House , even if nothing ever passes .
The McDonough meetings have served two purposes , Democratic officials said . One is to give lawmakers a high-level outlet to raise issues about implementation . The other is to provide confidence that their concerns will be addressed — in essence , persuade them to vent their frustrations privately with McDonough rather than take them public as Baucus did .