'Moms still have a lot of influence , ' Kathleen Sebelius said . Obamacare : Because Mom said so
All those groups trying to get the “ young , invincible ” 20-somethings to sign up for Obamacare health insurance have identified a secret weapon .
Advocacy groups from “ Moms Rising ” to AARP are working to reach the healthy , young adults who don ’ t think they need insurance — and their mothers who think they do . The groups plan to use everything from paid advertising — to guilt .
“ We ’ re going for the heartstrings , ” said Nicole Duritz , vice president of health and family education and outreach at AARP , which will be stepping up messaging later this summer as the Oct. 1 sign-up date nears .
Getting a critical mass of younger and healthier people to sign up along with older and sicker ones is critical to making the insurance markets work . The White House wants 7 million people enrolled in the exchanges by March , 2.7 million of them young adults .
HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius told reporters the messaging will include “ creative ways ” to reach out to young , healthy people who “ may not get up every morning thinking about health insurance . ”
“ We know that for instance — and I take this very personally — that moms can be influential with that demographic group , ” added Sebelius , who has two young adult sons of her own .
Breaking through isn ’ t easy . Younger adults have a high rate of uninsurance , and some research shows they are less likely to sign up for coverage than older adults , even when it ’ s subsidized by their job . They may not want to pony up for insurance when they ’ re paying off college loans , saving for a car , setting up their first home — particularly if they don ’ t expect to need coverage . Since the law was passed , people can stay on their parents ’ health plan until age 26 . But the advocates want them to age into another form of insurance , not into being uncovered .
Everyone working on the mom angle rushes to say that they are reaching out to dads , too . But they cite evidence that mothers are the primary health care decision makers and medical appointment-makers in the family , from the Band-Aid on the first scraped knee right up through those early years of not-quite all grown up .
“ Our research shows the No . 1 most-effective messenger is their mother , ” said Anne Filipic , a former Obama aide who is now president of Enroll America , a coalition working on public education and sign-up for the law . The group will reach out to moms in its campaign this summer and fall that includes volunteers going door-to-door in targeted communities .
Other advocates pitching in on the enrollment drive , including Moms Rising , plan to use some paid media and lots of parent-focused blogging and social media . They also plan on injecting some insurance information into the mother-to-mother grapevine .
Young adults are also a prime focus of the anti-Obamacare messaging . The law ’ s opponents are emphasizing its high costs , “ premium shock ” and government-mandated health benefits that may be more than some people , particularly in this age bracket , want or need .
“ When young people are struggling with a stagnant economy and finding it difficult to get an initial step on the career ladder , it ’ s asking a lot — even coming from a mother — to have a child pay $ 200 , $ 300 , even $ 500 , for health insurance , ” said Chris Jacobs , a health policy analyst at The Heritage Foundation . The penalty for going without , he noted , is just $ 95 in the first year .