Senate Republicans may be all over the map on an Obamacare repeal plan , but on one fundamental point — reducing insurance premiums — they are in danger of overpromising and underdelivering .
The reality is they have only a few ways to reduce Americans ’ premiums : Offer consumers bigger subsidies . Allow insurers to offer skimpier coverage . Or permit insurers to charge more — usually much more — to those with pre-existing illnesses and who are older and tend to rack up the biggest bills .
Since there ’ s no appetite within the GOP for throwing more taxpayer money at the problem , Republicans will need to make some hard decisions to hit their goal . But the effort to drive down premium prices will inevitably create a new set of winners and losers and complicate leadership ’ s path to the 50 votes they need to fulfill their seven-year promise to repeal Obamacare .
“ Anyone can figure out how to reduce premiums , ” said Sen. Chris Murphy ( D-Conn. ) . “ You can reduce premiums by kicking everybody that has a pre-existing condition off insurance or dramatically reducing benefits . ”
Republicans say that Obamacare ’ s insurance regulations are responsible for making coverage prohibitively expensive and contend that premiums would fall if those rules are rolled back . They say they have multiple ideas about how to roll those back while also insulating the most vulnerable but have yet to weave those together into actual legislation .
███ Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight , every weekday morning — in your inbox . Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from ███ . You can unsubscribe at any time .
“ We can overcomplicate it , ” said Sen. Thom Tillis ( R-N.C. ) said of reducing premiums . “ But at the end of the day , does it make sense for a family that ’ s trying to get health care , trying to pay for their insurance ? ”
The reality may not be so straightforward : Just ask ex-President Barack Obama , who promised that his health care overhaul would save families $ 2,500 and that consumers would be able to keep their doctor or insurance plan if they wanted .
In the decades before Obamacare , premiums were also rising nearly every year as a result of the introduction of expensive new drugs and procedures , as well as medical tests . Those factors are likely to continue to push up health care costs in a post-Obamacare world , not to mention that insurers are the ones who actually price the coverage and set rates each year .
Analysts say Republicans might achieve their goal for younger , healthier consumers , but at the cost of wiping out popular consumer safeguards like the ban on insurers charging more for coverage to those with pre-existing conditions . That , in turn , could leave millions unable to afford the hikes associated with heart disease or rheumatoid arthritis or cancer .
The Congressional Budget Office ’ s report on the House repeal plan also made the task of Senate Republicans more difficult . The analysis concluded that allowing states to opt out of Obamacare ’ s pre-existing condition requirement would destabilize markets and in some cases , drive premiums upward for older , sicker people . Several Republican sources say the CBO ’ s assessment would encourage lawmakers to preserve Obamacare ’ s pre-existing condition policy .
Not everyone is convinced . Sen. Ron Johnson ( R-Wis. ) said Obamacare ’ s pre-existing condition policy is the “ biggest reason ” premiums have gone up .
“ A lot of people don ’ t want to touch that , ” Johnson said of his fellow Republicans . “ I would like to . Because I think you can handle pre-existing conditions in a different way without collapsing markets . ”
Most Republicans do support allowing insurers to sell more basic and , therefore , cheaper policies without , say , maternity coverage , mental health or prescription drug benefits . They argue that consumers should be able to buy more basic — and inexpensive — policies tailored to their specific needs . The problem is , they may not be able to make such changes under the complex rules governing the fast-track process being used to avoid a Democratic filibuster .
Some Republicans also support allowing insurers to charge older people higher premiums despite the likely political blowback , although Republican leaders appear to have been spooked by the storm House Republicans faced when they raised the idea .
Ultimately , the GOP drive to reduce premiums could wind up expanding the number of uninsured Americans . The CBO also estimated that the House repeal bill , which would scrap many insurance regulations , would result in 23 million more uninsured Americans by 2026 than under the Affordable Care Act .
Premiums vary all over the country but have generally been on the rise . This year , benchmark Obamacare policies in 17 major cities rose an average of 9 percent , according to the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation . That ’ s up from 2 percent in 2016 .
There also have been eye-popping rate increases in Obamacare plans — in some places , doubling in one year .
But while lawmakers can tweak market conditions in the hope of making premiums fall , they don ’ t control how insurers set rates .
“ If it were easy , it would have been done last week , ” said Sen. Mike Rounds ( R-S.D . ) , who was an insurance executive before he ran for public office . “ The real challenge for us is recognizing how you bring the actual cost back down and transfer the cost to a willing business community , ” he said , referring to insurance companies .
Rounds said the GOP can drive down premiums by eliminating Obamacare requirements such as mandates on how much of the health care expenses a plan has to cover and age bands that prevent insurers from charging older people more than three times what younger people pay .
“ In the end , reducing cost is going to be ultimately the way ” the bill is judged , said Sen. John Thune of South Dakota , the Senate ’ s No . 3 Republican .
When asked whether that ’ s going to be possible , Thune said , “ That is the goal . ”
Republicans , mindful of the Democrats ' experience when Obamacare was enacted in 2010 , have been careful not to put a dollar figure on how much premiums will decline .
“ The thing we ’ ll be judged by is the extent to which we ’ ve overcome the promises of the Obama administration , ” said Sen. Chuck Grassley of Iowa , a top Republican on the Senate Finance Committee , enumerating promises Democrats made about Obamacare that didn ’ t pan out , including falling premiums and consumers being able to maintain their care arrangements .
“ The bottom line , ” he said , “ is we need to make sure what we can do to make sure that that doesn ’ t happen again . ”