Hillary Clinton ignored the latest bad Obamacare news on the stump Tuesday , as she strived to survive through the November election before confronting the first major challenge for the next president : how to save President Obama ’ s health law .
The administration ’ s admission this week that premiums for Obamacare ’ s benchmark plans will spike an average of 22 percent nationally in 2017 has further dented the law , and left its defenders struggling for answers .
Mrs. Clinton , despite being the original author of HillaryCare , Democrats ’ 1990s-era foray into expanding health care , didn ’ t touch the issue at campaign rally in Florida , keeping her campaign focused on early voting and attacks on GOP nominee Donald Trump .
Yet even if Mrs. Clinton defeats Mr. Trump in November , her plans to put Obamacare on firm economic footing face significant headwinds , as her “ fixes ” would require politically painful requests for more taxpayer spending and a bigger government footprint in the law ’ s insurance exchanges .
Her platform calls for a $ 5,000 tax credit for families with high out-of-pocket costs and fix to the “ family glitch ” that bars spouses and children from subsidized coverage because employer coverage appears affordable for the worker in the family . She also wants to put a 8.5 percent cap on the share of income someone must pay for a benchmark plan on the exchanges , so that even people making more than 400 percent of the federal poverty level could get assistance in some instances .
Mrs. Clinton also faces a tall order in rallying support for a government-run insurance plan , or “ public option , ” to compete with private plans in the exchanges , particularly in areas where private insurers have fled the program .
SEE ALSO : Huma Abedin said Hillary Clinton was ‘ still not perfect in her head , ’ WikiLeaks emails reveal
All four of Mrs. Clinton ’ s major proposals , combined , would increase the deficit by $ 88.5 billion in 2018 , according to a recent RAND Corporation analysis , meaning she would have to push for higher taxes on high-income families or look for cuts elsewhere to make the reforms more palatable to Congress .
“ I don ’ t think the Republicans are going to go along with giving Obamacare a blank check from the U.S. Treasury , ” said Robert Laszewski , a health policy consultant in Alexandria , Virginia .
Obamacare is suffering from the early stages of the dreaded “ death-spiral. ” While older , sicker Americans signed up , younger and healthier Americans have balked , opting instead to pay the tax penalty or claim an exemption . Without them , the insurance companies are having to raise rates or drop out of markets , leaving less competition , chasing still more customers out of the market and spawning even higher premiums .
Some analysts said Mrs. Clinton ’ s plans could entice those desirable customers back .
“ I think if health care was more affordable for higher income people , that would get more people into the risk pool and healthier people into the risk pool , and that ’ s what we need , ” said Timothy Jost , a law professor at Washington and Lee University in Virginia who closely tracks the law .
But Republicans on Capitol Hill have said they won ’ t ask taxpayers to pick up the tab for rescuing the Affordable Care Act .
“ The president and Democrats want to throw more tax dollars at the problem and want to pass more laws to prop up Obamacare , but the last thing we need is more government involvement in health care , ” said Rep. Tom Price , Georgia Republican and key player in forging a GOP replacement plan .
Already , House Republicans are suing Mr. Obama over parts of the law that already exist , saying the president broke the law by spending money Congress refused to approve . The administration used the cash to pay back insurers who must help poorer enrollees with out-of-pocket costs .
Mr. Trump , who has vowed to work with congressional Republicans to repeal and replace Obamacare , used the rising premiums as a ballot-box prod Tuesday , arguing rising premiums will hit key swing states the hardest .
He said the Affordable Care Act is “ blowing up ” and that administration officials used a “ phony ” figure to downplay the damage .
“ That number is so wrong , ” he said of the administration ’ s premium increase estimate .
White House press secretary Josh Earnest shot back Tuesday , saying the vast majority of Obamacare customers “ will not see a significant increase in the amount that they pay for their health care , ” because taxpayers will pay for higher subsidies .
For her part , Mrs. Clinton says repeal would be counterproductive , since Obamacare ’ s extended coverage to more than 20 million additional people and provided a pathway to coverage for sick consumers who ’ ve been denied by insurers in the past .
She told some news outlets Tuesday there is a “ clear choice in this election . ”
“ Either we ’ re going to help American families and tackle health care cost issues , or we ’ re going to throw 20 million people off their coverage and let the insurance companies write the rules again , ” the Clinton campaign said in a statement . “ Hillary Clinton wants to build on the progress we ’ ve made and fix what ’ s broken , while Donald Trump would rip up the ACA , reverse the progress we have made and start this fight all over again . ”