More Access To Health Care Means Millions Can Quit Or Cut Hours
What might have been a routine update on the state of the federal budget Tuesday instead became the newest front in the ongoing political war over President Obama 's signature health care law .
At issue : a revised estimate about how many people would voluntarily leave the workforce because they can get health care without necessarily holding down a job .
The Congressional Budget Office originally predicted that the availability of subsidies for low-income Americans to buy health insurance would result in about 800,000 people leaving full-time work by 2023 . The revised estimate increases that number to about 2.5 million .
Republicans pounced , pointing at the nonpartisan office 's estimate as proof of the Affordable Care Act 's damaging effects on the economy . In a statement , House Speaker John Boehner said : `` The middle class is getting squeezed in this economy , and this CBO report confirms that Obamacare is making it worse . ''
Texas Republican John Cornyn took to the Senate floor with the same message . `` The president 's own health care policy ... is killing full-time work , and putting people in part-time work , '' he said .
Obama 's White House wasted little time responding , sending Council of Economic Advisers Chairman Jason Furman to the daily press briefing . There , Furman turned Cornyn 's charge on its head , arguing that if some people are able to work part time and spend more time with their children , or if others can leave a job to start a business of their own without fear of losing health insurance , then these are good things happening because of the Affordable Care Act .
`` This is a choice on the part of workers , '' Furman said . `` I have no doubt that if , for example , we got rid of Social Security and Medicare , there are many 95-year-olds that would choose to work more . I do n't think anyone would say that was a compelling argument to eliminate Social Security and Medicare , '' Furman said .
The White House also pointed out that on the topic of a longtime and separate Republican charge — that the law encourages businesses to lay off or reduce the hours of workers — the CBO found little evidence of this happening .
CBO Director Douglas Elmendorf also said during a news conference that the existence of employees who have the ability to choose not to work is proof that they will be better off .
`` The Affordable Care Act is reducing the labor supply of lower-income people in our estimates partly because it is making them better off , '' he said . `` It is providing a valuable benefit to them . ''
On the larger question of whether the health care law helps or hurts the budget picture , the CBO is sticking to its last analysis , done in 2012 , that the law overall reduces federal deficits , Elmendorf said .
S.V . Dáte edits congressional and campaign finance coverage for NPR 's Washington Desk .