The author says this doesn ’ t have to be Republicans ’ 'last stand . ' Destroying Obamacare from within
As a Sept. 30 budget deadline approaches , many in the Republican Party are pushing to repeal the Affordable Care Act , better known as Obamacare . The law ’ s most radical opponents are even threatening to shut down the government by refusing to pass a continuing resolution , which would fund existing government programs at current or slightly adjusted levels .
The political flaws of this strategy have been debated endlessly inside the GOP . But there is another important consideration : This doesn ’ t have to be Republicans ’ “ last stand. ” Obamacare doesn ’ t have to be rolled back from without ; it can be replaced from within . And Medicare , perhaps surprisingly , shows the way .
Medicare – the federal government ’ s program providing health-insurance coverage to the elderly and the disabled – remains one of the hallmark achievements of President Lyndon Johnson ’ s “ Great Society. ” Since its inception , the program has grown drastically – from less than 1 percent of all federal spending to around 13.5 percent in 2012 . The Congressional Budget Office estimates that the figure will reach 18 percent in a mere decade . But changes to the program over the past 10 years have produced better value for taxpayers ’ health-care dollars .
The Medicare Advantage program , for instance – with about 27 percent of Medicare ’ s total enrollment – lets newly eligible Medicare beneficiaries choose Medicare-equivalent coverage from private insurers . Individuals can select from a variety of plans with varying levels of premiums , copayments , and drug coverage . This approach has introduced competition into Medicare , as insurers bid among each other to offer the most valuable benefit packages at the lowest cost . Most important , the program has pioneered new and promising ways to deliver care .
And it ’ s working . Recent evidence indicates the added layer of competition and use of managed care in Medicare Advantage has resulted in significantly better outcomes for patients . A recent study by the Boston Consulting Group found that people who enroll in Medicare Advantage tend to fare better than those in traditional Medicare – even when accounting for health status and demographics ( Medicare Advantage has more low-income and minority beneficiaries ) . Patients treated through the managed-care environments preferred by Medicare Advantage had lower mortality rates , shorter hospital stays , and lower hospital readmission rates , as well as fewer visits to the emergency room . Simply put , this means that Medicare Advantage enrollees get more bang for their buck .
Medicare Advantage isn ’ t perfect . Although private plans routinely bid under Medicare ’ s costs , payments tend to be about 4 percent higher than Medicare . Because of the way plans are paid – using a “ regional benchmark ” tied to traditional Medicare costs – the “ pure bids ” are adjusted for a number of factors that increase the actual payments to plans , such as enrollee health status . Moreover , traditional Medicare doesn ’ t directly “ compete ” with Medicare Advantage – that is , enrollees aren ’ t penalized if they choose the relatively more expensive program . Eliminating the benchmark and moving the entire program – traditional Medicare and Medicare Advantage – to a “ premium support ” model – with vouchers pegged to the cost of the second-cheapest plan ( be it traditional Medicare , or private plans ) , for instance – would inject even more competition into Medicare while still offering value for taxpayers ’ dollars .
So what ’ s the moral of the story ? A flawed program – Medicare – was amended using a smart , market-oriented “ scalpel ” rather than a butcher knife . Similarly targeted , competition-focused fixes to Obamacare would effectively overturn the law without repealing it .
Here ’ s how to wield that scalpel : For starters , Republicans should work to abolish the law ’ s employer mandate , which requires employers with 50 or more employees to offer health insurance , else pay a penalty . The GOP should also end the tax breaks for employer-provided health insurance — or , alternatively , make the tax exclusion available to everyone . Across the board , economists and health services researchers agree that one of the most pernicious arrangements in the American health-care system is employer-sponsored health insurance . A slew of tax breaks make health insurance cheaper for employers than paying wages . The tax breaks over-insure Americans , drive up the cost of health-care services ( when someone else pays your bills , you ’ re not as picky about costs ) , and reduce cash wages .
Going forward , smart reforms to Obamacare would extend subsidies to more bare-bones “ catastrophic ” plans – those that have high deductibles – while loosening restrictions on what qualifies as insurance , allowing more choice and competition in the exchanges . The GOP should hammer home the point that currently , subsidies extend even to middle-class recipients who may not need them – a family of four making $ 94,000 qualifies for subsidies , for instance . Re-targeting the subsidies to those who need them would streamline the law and reduce its total cost .
There are many other approaches that can , in effect , overturn Obamacare without repealing the law . But the GOP needs to formulate a real plan for health-care reform . Simply being against something isn ’ t enough .
Yevgeniy Feyman is research associate at the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research .