One of Congress ’ staunchest critics of Obamacare released a report Monday that cheers on legal challenges to the overhaul and says the White House overstepped its authority by delaying aspects of the law .
Sen. Ted Cruz , Texas Republican who helped engineer a lengthy government funding stalemate earlier this year in a bid to block money for the new health care law , said many aspects of the Affordable Care Act are “ constitutionally or statutorily suspect ” and that the entire law should be repealed .
While a repeal is unlikely so long as Democrats control the Senate and White House , Mr. Cruz said President Obama deserves flak for taking unilateral steps to put off portions of the law , saying the president and fellow Democrats were responsible for this summer ’ s government shutdown .
“ Democrats forced a government shutdown instead of agreeing to a congressional delay of Obamacare , but now the Obama administration is unilaterally delaying it , ” he wrote in his report . “ This undermines the rule of law . ”
The White House has argued they are open to improving Mr. Obama ’ s signature law and that they ’ re being flexible by putting off certain portions .
In July , the Obama administration announced a one-year delay of the employer mandate requiring larger firms to provide health insurance to full-time employees . Republicans criticized the move as an attempt to implement an unpopular provision after the mid-term elections .
Mr. Cruz ’ s report also notes delays to a cap on out-of-pocket health expenses , that Mr. Obama is allowing people to renew for one-year plans that do not meet the law ’ s requirements . Federal lawmakers and staff are also able to keep a generous employer subsidy to pay for premiums even though they are now forced under the law to get their insurance through an Obamacare exchange .
“ Obamacare does not allow ‘ official ’ congressional staff to continue receiving pre-Obamacare federal health insurance plans ; instead these staff are forced to go through the Obamacare exchanges to purchase health insurance , ” he said . “ So just like average Americans , these individual congressional staffers will have to purchase a plan for themselves . ”
Mr. Cruz will avoid the debate , personally , because he will obtain his health coverage from his wife ’ s employer , a spokesman has said .
The outspoken freshman senator also said the health care law violates the Constitution ’ s so-called origination clause , because it raises revenue but the bill did not originate in the House . Instead , he said , Democrats played a “ shell game ” by stripping out language from an unrelated House bill to replace it with the health law .
He also comes down on the side of plaintiffs leading two high-profile legal challenges to the law .
His report says the Obama administration infringed on business owners ’ religious freedoms by forcing larger corporations to insure contraception , and that it violated the plain language of the health care law by extending premium subsidies to states that let the federal government run their exchanges .
The Supreme Court is taking up the contraception case this term , and a federal judge is expected to rule on the subsidies issue later this month .