WASHINGTON , DC – Obamacare was back in court Tuesday facing yet another legal challenge . At issue in the `` Texas vs. United States '' case is whether a lower court judge acted properly in striking down the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) , declaring the law unconstitutional after Congress ended the `` individual mandate '' .
The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals appeared sympathetic Tuesday to Republican efforts to overturn Obamacare . They expressed skepticism about Democratic calls to overturn the lower court ruling .
The judges focused on whether Obamacare lost its legal justification after President Trump signed a law in 2017 that eliminated the tax penalty – known as the `` individual mandate '' – that had enforced Obamacare 's mandate that all Americans must buy health insurance . Whatever the court decides , the case could go to the US Supreme Court .
As the appeals court heard arguments on the ACA 's constitutionality , Democrats on Capitol Hill held a press conference warning what could happen if Obamacare is struck down .
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer ( D-NY ) said , `` The stakes ca n't be higher . ''
Democrat lawmakers held up pictures of Americans positively affected by Obamacare and said Republicans would be to blame if millions of Americans were to lose their health care .
`` If Republicans prevail , the protections are obliterated overnight , '' continued Schumer . `` They go home and they say they want to protect pre-existing conditions , and then they act to take them away… they say they want to protect and then do nothing to preserve them . ''
But on the Senate floor , Republican Sen. John Cornyn ( R-TX ) argued that claim is untrue .
`` Blaming Republicans in Congress for a yet-to-be-decided court case does n't make a lot of sense , '' Cornyn claimed . `` If there 's one thing that I think there is a consensus on in the health care field in Congress it 's the pre-existing conditions should be covered . ''
Meanwhile , at the Faith and Freedom Coalition 's Road to the Majority conference last week , President Donald Trump teased a forthcoming GOP health care plan .
`` If we win the House back , keep the Senate and keep the presidency , we 're going to have a plan that blows away Obamacare , '' Trump told the crowd . `` It 'll be less expensive and it 'll be far better health insurance and we 'll be announcing it over the next month or so . ''
Many analysts believe if the 5th Circuit upholds Obamacare , the US Supreme Court wo n't take it up again .