The Congressional Budget Office offered a mixed review of the GOP 's American Health Care Act plan to repeal and replace Obamacare on Monday . While the CBO score predicted it would lower premiums in the long run and stabilize the markets , predictions which House Speaker Paul Ryan chose to highlight , the agency also foresaw 14 million people losing their insurance by 2018 .
House leaders like Kevin McCarthy responded to the more sinister parts of the report by noting this is only the first phase of their plan . The CBO is not able to paint a full picture because `` they 're not able to see the second and third phase '' yet of the AHCA , he said on Fox News Tuesday morning .
Sen. Tom Cotton ( R-AR ) , one of many skeptical Republicans , told radio host Hugh Hewitt on Tuesday that the three-phase process is a myth . What we see right now is what we get .
`` Hugh , there is no three-phase process , '' Cotton said . `` There is no three-step plan . That is just political talk . It ’ s just politicians engaging in spin . This is why . Step one is a bill that can pass with 51 votes in the Senate . That ’ s what we ’ re working on right now . Step two , as yet unwritten regulations by Tom Price , which is going to be subject to court challenge , and therefore , perhaps the whims of the most liberal judge in America . But step three , some mythical legislation in the future that is going to garner Democratic support and help us get over 60 votes in the Senate . If we had those Democratic votes , we wouldn ’ t need three steps . We would just be doing that right now on this legislation altogether . That ’ s why it ’ s so important that we get this legislation right , because there is no step three . And step two is not completely under our control . ''
`` The three-phase plan is not a myth , '' he insisted on Tuesday , noting they have to go through reconciliation .
The health care plan passed both the Ways and Means and Energy and Commerce committees and will next enter the Budget committee and eventually reach the floor .
`` We do n't want to play any games . we want to proceed according to the structure , '' McCarthy noted .
The conservative members of the House Freedom Caucus will take some extra convincing , as they have refused to accept any Obamacare replacement plan that does not completely repeal Obama 's signature legislation . President Trump has been inviting them to the White House for pizza parties to discuss the legislation in a casual environment to try and find a compromise .
Cotton has noted , at least , that it may take a lot of carpentry , but the bill `` can be fixed . ''