The opinions expressed by columnists are their own and do not represent the views of Townhall.com .
For more than seven years , Republican lawmakers , including President Trump , campaigned on a promise to repeal Obamacare .
They rightly noted that Obamacare severely disrupted the health insurance markets , making health plans prohibitively expensive for many Americans . They reminded everyone of Obama ’ s hollow promise that those who wanted to keep their health care plan or their doctor could do so if they wished .
The drumbeat was such that in 2015 , when President Obama was still in office , Congress managed to pass a partial repeal of Obamacare .
The effort was vetoed , of course . But conservatives didn ’ t give up .
We kept sounding the alarm about the damage that Congress had unleashed by foisting the ironically named “ Affordable Care Act ” on the public , while the Obama administration insulated them from the full costs of the program with taxpayer subsidies that were never even appropriated . We ran the numbers . We chronicled the plight of real Americans suffering under the law .
Fast forward to 2017 . The party that ran on a repeal platform now holds the White House and a majority in both houses of Congress . Surely the plug would finally be pulled on Obamacare .
But no . In a vote that ignored the clear will of the American people , the Senate recently voted against taking the next step in undoing this damage .
In 2015 , it was a cakewalk . Now , when there is an administration and a Congress in place that could get the job done , lawmakers have balked at the hard work of governing and undoing the hardships of this disastrous law .
And make no mistake , undoing is exactly what is required here . No half-measures will do . Repeal is a must .
Obamacare can not be fixed or bailed out . The law ’ s mandates , insurance regulations , taxes , and expansion of government simply go too deep . No partial effort to address these problems can truly free Americans from the high insurance costs and limited choice they now face .
“ For millions of middle-class Americans , paying their health insurance bills is now equivalent to taking out a second mortgage , ” writes health care policy expert Robert Moffit . “ Competition among insurers is declining precipitously in the individual markets ( Aetna just recently pulled out of the Obamacare exchanges ) , and more and more Americans are left with fewer choices and narrower networks of doctors and other medical professionals . ”
That ’ s why it ’ s time for Congress to get back to work . Lawmakers need to revisit Obamacare ’ s central problems , pronto .
Step one , according to Moffit , is to cut Obamacare ’ s slew of taxes . Step two is to give the people and their state lawmakers the freedom to decide for themselves ( using an amended version of Obamacare ’ s own Section 1332 waiver process ) whether they want to keep Obamacare ’ s costly insurance regulations and mandates .
Step three : phase down higher Medicaid payments to able-bodied adults without children who can work . This would reorient federal spending toward the poorest and most vulnerable recipients .
Congress also could use a taste of its own medicine , so to speak , which is why President Trump should cancel the illegal taxpayer insurance subsidies for congressional health coverage — monies drawn from the Treasury by the Obama administration without statutory authorization .
“ That way , House and Senate members and staff can fully experience Obamacare the way that millions of middle-class Americans do — having to pay inflated premiums without the benefit of special taxpayer subsidies that are available to no other class of American citizens , ” Moffit writes . “ If members of Congress want Obamacare , they should get it — good and hard . ”
In Washington , there are no permanent victories or permanent defeats . We must continue to press to completely roll back the damage caused by Obamacare and replace it with a patient-centered health system that works better for all Americans .