With Democrats debating a variety of ways to expand access to health care and President Trump promising a “ phenomenal ” plan at some point in the future , it ’ s a good bet that there could be significant changes ahead for the U.S. health care system . The leading Democratic presidential candidates spent a lot of time discussing the relative merits of Medicare for All at the debate Tuesday , but that ’ s just one of several options that are currently under consideration by lawmakers and policy experts .
A team of researchers from the Urban Institute released a study Wednesday that examines different plans for reform . Among other things , they found that it ’ s possible to deliver universal healthcare without ripping up the current system or driving federal expenditures dramatically higher all at once .
Medicare for All would cost $ 34 trillion over 10 years . An “ enhanced ” Medicare-for-All plan that covers everyone in the country ( including undocumented immigrants ) and offers more benefits than the current system , including dental , vision , hearing and long-term services and supports , would raise national spending on health care by nearly $ 3 trillion in 2020 and $ 34 trillion , or $ 32 trillion after tax offsets , over 10 years . Employer spending on health care would decrease by $ 955 billion , and household spending would fall by $ 887 billion , but $ 2.7 trillion in additional federal revenue would be needed to finance the new program . “ It is a big lift to get this kind of money , for sure , ” John Holahan , one of the report ’ s authors , told the Associated Press .
An “ enhanced ” Medicare-for-All plan that covers everyone in the country ( including undocumented immigrants ) and offers more benefits than the current system , including dental , vision , hearing and long-term services and supports , would raise national spending on health care by nearly $ 3 trillion in 2020 and $ 34 trillion , or $ 32 trillion after tax offsets , over 10 years . Employer spending on health care would decrease by $ 955 billion , and household spending would fall by $ 887 billion , but $ 2.7 trillion in additional federal revenue would be needed to finance the new program . “ It is a big lift to get this kind of money , for sure , ” John Holahan , one of the report ’ s authors , told the Associated Press . A “ lite ” Medicare-for-All plan would cost roughly $ 17.6 trillion over 10 years . A plan that includes some out-of-pocket expenses based on income and a less generous set of expanded benefits would cost about half of the enhanced version . This plan , which would cover all legal residents in the U.S. but not the 10.8 million undocumented immigrants in the country , would reduce national spending on health care by about $ 209 billion in 2020 . Federal spending would increase by $ 1.5 trillion in the first year , but total health-care spending would fall by about $ 210 billion as a result of lower provider payment rates and administrative savings .
A plan that includes some out-of-pocket expenses based on income and a less generous set of expanded benefits would cost about half of the enhanced version . This plan , which would cover all legal residents in the U.S. but not the 10.8 million undocumented immigrants in the country , would reduce national spending on health care by about $ 209 billion in 2020 . Federal spending would increase by $ 1.5 trillion in the first year , but total health-care spending would fall by about $ 210 billion as a result of lower provider payment rates and administrative savings . Medicare for All isn ’ t the only path to universal coverage . One of the plans in the report , involving a mix of private and public health insurance , would cover everyone in the U.S. except for 6.6 million undocumented immigrants . The plan would beef up Obamacare subsidies , expand Medicaid to all states , provide a public option and cap payment rates . Federal spending would increase by $ 122.1 billion if implemented next year and by $ 1.5 trillion over 10 years , but total national health spending would fall by $ 22.6 billion in 2020 .
Sara Collins , a vice president at the Commonwealth Fund , which funded the study , said that report shows that universal health care coverage “ can be reached in different ways ” – and , we should add , with very different costs .