The state 's innovative Medicaid expansion — which uses the public program 's dollars to buy enrollees private coverage — has cut the uninsured rate nearly in half and become a model for other red states . Mark Pryor , Arkansas 's vulnerable Democratic senator , is running on health reform . And on Tuesday , news broke that insurance premiums on the state exchange would fall in 2015 .
Preliminary rate information was accidentally leaked late last week , and reported by the Arkansas Times . On Tuesday , the governor 's office released a statement confirming that `` the Arkansas Insurance Department is projecting that insurance policies sold through the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace will see a net decrease of two percent in premium costs for 2015 . ''
The projected reduction is an average : premiums will go up for some people and down for others . Importantly , even with rate reductions , the amount of subsidy that a person is entitled to could change because of the new prices . Rather than auto-renew , enrollees should log into the state marketplace and make sure that their plans still match their budget .
This means that Arkansas will stand apart from national averages . A preliminary analysis by PricewaterhouseCooper pegs next year 's average rate increase at about 8.2 percent . In the years before health reform , premiums in the individual market climbed between 10 and 15 percent annually .
The state might chalk up the reduction to a quirk in their Medicaid expansion
Why the net decrease ? The state may have their special Medicaid expansion to thank .
Conservative politicians in Arkansas outright rejected a standard expansion of the public program . Instead , they crafted something we now call the `` private option : '' newly-eligible beneficiaries enroll in private plans offered through the state 's insurance exchange , rather than through Medicaid itself . The federal government foots the bill just like they would in Medicaid .
But there 's a catch : Arkansas kept the sickest — and , not coincidentally , most expensive — beneficiaries in the public program .
Using a 12-question survey and an algorithm , the state wants to siphon off the sickest 10 percent of patients to keep in public Medicaid . Since enrollees in the private option are entitled to all Medicaid benefits — including services that private insurers do n't provide , like transportation to and from medical appointments — the state hopes to reduce the need for coordination between private plans and the public program for these additional benefits .
ARKANSAS kept THE SICKEST , most expensive BENEFICIARIES IN THE PUBLIC PROGRAM .
But by holding back the sickest Medicaid patients , the pool of enrollees in the exchange 's private plans might be healthier , on average , than insurers expected.The private option beneficiaries make up over three-quarters of the state 's current exchange population , and they skew younger than the state 's general uninsured population .
Does that mean the private option is a good deal ?
The pool of plans that the Arkansas marketplace analyzed includes coverage offered through the `` private option , '' Arkansas 's unique private Medicaid expansion .
And if Arkansas does chalk up lower premiums in 2015 to their health private-option enrollees , it might make this unique form of expansion more appealing to states that have opposed expanding Medicaid .
But in other states , the demographics of the Medicaid population could be different , and less healthy on average . Moreover , expanding through private coverage is still , on net , more expensive than expanding through traditional Medicaid . Arkansas is shielded from this for the first few years , but eventually the state will need to pick up 10 percent of the tab .
The private option could be both more expensive than traditional Medicaid and `` worth it . '' What remains to be seen — and what we wo n't know for many years — is whether the private option really offered better access and care than traditional Medicaid would have .
But there 's a logical wrinkle that has remained largely unaddressed : if public Medicaid is superior to private coverage for sick patients — the ones who really need access to high-quality care — why shunt everyone else who gained Medicaid eligibility into the more expensive private market ?