Apparently , Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius and President Obama thought implementing ObamaCare by destroying the current system would be smooth and easy . She was wrong :
Health and Human Services ( HHS ) Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said Monday that she did not anticipate how complicated implementing the president 's signature healthcare law would be .
`` The politics has been relentless and that continues , '' Sebelius said , according to Reuters . `` There was some hope that once the Supreme Court ruled in July , and then once an election occurred there would be a sense that , 'This is the law of the land , let 's get on board , let 's make this work . ' And yet we will find ourselves having state-by-state political battles . ''
Speaking to students at the Harvard School of Public Health , Sebelius said implementation had been hampered both by the law 's slow roll out and red-state governors and legislators who have rejected state-run insurance exchanges .
`` It is very difficult when people live in a state where there is a daily declaration , 'We will not participate in the law , ' for them to figure out whether they are going to benefit , '' Sebelius said .
When people say ObamaCare is a nightmare , they mean it quite literally . It 's amazing Sebelius and Obama just expected every Republican governor would go right along with their plan , despite the extremely negative economic consequences . Not to mention , is she really still trying to push the `` this will benefit you '' line ? People have always hated ObamaCare and they hate it even more now . On January 1 Americans saw five new ObamaCare taxes kick in , medical device companies are laying off workers , employers are either cutting hours or cutting workers to absorb the costs of the legislation , six in 10 doctors are expected to retire early , students are reconsidering med school and the average cost of a health insurance plan for a family of four under ObamaCare will be $ 20,000 . All great benefits .
39 . From what you ’ ve heard or read , do you approve or disapprove of the health care law that was enacted in 2010 ? IF APPROVE : Do you strongly approve or somewhat approve ? IF DISAPPROVE : Do you somewhat disapprove or strongly disapprove ?
40 . From what you ’ ve heard or read , do you think the 2010 health care law will mostly help you personally , will mostly hurt you personally , or don ’ t you think it will have much of an effect on you personally ?
The best we can hope for is that this thing collapses on itself , reverting back to the old system capable of new reforms and that people have a visceral reaction to future government overreaches into the healthcare system .