Women care about religious freedom and civil rights in business .
White House stance assumes women care more about their sex lives than about religious freedom .
It treats women as one-dimensional victims needing the protection of government-as-big-brother .
The Supreme Court yesterday agreed to hear two important cases about whether women and men who own businesses are protected by civil rights laws against religious discrimination . The Obama Administration says it can ignore religious freedom laws when regulating businesses and their owners because it believes earning money is inconsistent with exercising religion .
Reacting to the news that the Supreme Court will consider this important issue , the White House struck its typical pose as the one and only protector of , and voice for , `` women and families . '' The president assures us that he is pressing these cases so that `` women and families -- not their bosses or corporate CEOs '' make decisions about whether to use abortion-inducing drugs and devices .
The White House stance assumes that women care far more about free access to contraceptives , or their sex lives , than about religious freedom , or allowing businesses to have a conscience . This view of women is degrading . It treats women as one-dimensional victims needing the protection of government-as-big-brother .
Moreover , the government misjudges women at every turn . First , the idea that service to `` women and families '' requires crushing these businesses with fines is absurd because the businesses at issue are actually owned by . . . women and families . While it may have escaped White House notice , the plaintiffs in the two cases include women owners and operators of the relevant businesses . This should not be so surprising : there are more than ten million women-owned businesses in this country . And here in the 21st century , many women are the `` bosses and corporate CEOs '' the White House criticizes . Crushing businesses with fines-particularly businesses with women owners-hurts women , rather than helping them .
Second , the White House view ignores the fact that women benefit -- indeed , everyone benefits -- from having a job market in which people of all different faiths are able to create jobs . Hobby Lobby , for example , employs more than 13,000 people , and actually provides free contraceptives to its employees -- just not the small handful that can cause abortions . There are thousands of women whose lives are better and whose families are stronger and more secure because of those jobs . Crushing Hobby Lobby just because of its owners religious beliefs would hurt these women , not help them . The last thing our economy needs , and the last thing American families need , is the government shrinking the already too-small pool of available jobs .
Third , women actually tend to practice religion more than men . For this reason too , the government 's attack on religious freedom rights hurts women more than men .
The White House insists that its heavy-handed approach is needed to protect women because it thinks contraceptives are `` essential to women 's health . '' That is , to say the least , a highly dubious claim . Women get sick and die , for the most part , of things like heart attacks , strokes and cancer . Their long list of ailments rarely calls for free contraceptives to solve a health problem . In fact , as Judge Janice Rogers Brown recently noted , there are credible medical sources ( like the World Health Organization ) who now classify some hormonal contraceptives as carcinogens . Americans spend millions of dollars a year to buy chicken and meat that have not been pumped full of synthetic hormones-precisely because they fear the associated medical risks .
But even if the government is right about how we all need easy access to contraceptives all the time , there can be no serious argument that the only way to provide us with our pills is to force unwilling employers to pay for them . Contraceptives are widely available and cheap . And for those who can not afford them , the government already spends millions of dollars per year providing them for free . With the Obamacare exchanges now open , if the federal government thinks more women need or want this insurance coverage , it now runs a marketplace in which they can get it .
Women do not need big brother steamrolling religious liberty to make their lives better . They would prefer to hold onto religious liberty itself .
Helen Alvare is a law professor at George Mason University and the founder of Women Speak for Themselves .
In addition to its own editorials , ███ publishes diverse opinions from outside writers , including our Board of Contributors . To read more columns like this , go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @ USATopinion or Facebook .