When the Supreme Court rules in King v. Burwell , the new Obamacarechallenge , its judges wo n't be the first to grapple with whether the health law 's subsidies on the federal marketplace are legal .
Since early 2014 , five separate courts have issued rulings on the issue in three separate health law challenges . Three courts have ruled in the Affordable Care Act 's favor ; two have ruled against the subsidies .
Even for those following the case closely , it can be difficult to keep track of all those decisions . That 's why my colleague Anand Katakam and I put together this timeline of all the court decisions :
This challenge , filed in late 2012 by Oklahoma Attorney General Scott Pruitt , was the first lawsuit to argue that Obamacare 's subsidies on the federal marketplace were illegal . It 's important because it marked the first time a plaintiff actually got on board with a legal argument that had been circulating in conservative legal circles for about a year . Even though Pruitt was filed first , it has moved the slowest through the courts . It was only this past fall that a district court ruled in Oklahoma 's favor , finding the Obama administration 's decision to administer subsidies on the federal marketplace to be `` arbitrary , capricious , an abuse of discretion or otherwise not in accordance with law . ''
Challengers filed in court in May 2013 , about six months after the Pruitt case . The Competitive Enterprise Institute is funding this case , as well as King v. Burwell . Halbig is different from Pruitt because it includes private citizens and businesses as its plaintiffs . This was strategic on the part of the law 's challengers : they wanted to give courts as many different arguments as possible to choose from . In Halbig , a district court initially ruled in the government 's favor — but the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia reversed that decision in July . This is the other ruling against the law , alongside Pruitt .
This is the lawsuit that the Supreme Court decided to hear in November . Like Halbig , it also includes private citizens and business owners as challengers to the law . Both courts that have heard the King argument have ruled in the Obama administration 's favor , finding the health law 's subsidies to be legal .
There is a fourth challenge to the health law 's subsidies , Indiana v. IRS . This challenge includes the state of Indiana as well as dozens of Indiana school districts , also arguing against the health law 's subisidies . We did not , however , include it in our timeline as there have not yet been any court decisions on the case .
This post is indebted to Michael Cannon , who has aggregated these documents ( as well as many others ) in his Forbes guide to the health law challenges .