Arkansas illustrates not only the potential benefits but also the major challenges facing states as they plan for a larger Medicaid program . The state does not have enough doctors and other health care workers to care for all the new beneficiaries , experts say , and state officials worry about the costs .
“ The expansion of Medicaid is a sea change , and it ’ s occurring at the most difficult fiscal time in the history of the program , ” said the Medicaid director in Arkansas , R. Andrew Allison , who is the president of the National Association of Medicaid Directors . “ States are preoccupied with the challenge of sustaining the Medicaid program we already have . ”
Arkansas officials have discussed cutting Medicaid services in the coming year to help close a gap between Medicaid costs and expected state appropriations . The gap — up to $ 400 million — represents more than one-fourth of state spending on the program .
Medicaid is jointly financed by the federal government and the states , with Washington paying 50 percent of the costs in higher-income states and about 70 percent in lower-income states like Arkansas . States have historically had leeway to define eligibility and benefits within guidelines set by federal law .
Under the new law , the federal government will pay the full cost of covering those newly eligible for Medicaid for three years , from 2014 to 2016 , and the federal share will then gradually decline to 90 percent in 2020 and later years . Administration officials say this is a good deal for states , but it may ultimately create new costs for states . Many state officials also worry that Congress will reduce the federal share and shift more costs to the states .
“ There is uncertainty , very commonly conveyed to me by states , that the law as written now will somehow have to change to address the federal government ’ s fiscal crisis , ” Mr. Allison said .
In challenging the constitutionality of the new health care law , 26 states have asserted that Congress can not force them to make such a large expansion of Medicaid . The case raises profound questions about Congress ’ s ability to attach conditions to money that it distributes to states not only for health care but also for education , transportation and myriad other purposes . At some point , the states argue , financial inducement turns into coercion .
The expansion of Medicaid would have a large impact in relatively poor states like Arkansas , where current eligibility criteria for adults are strict and chronic conditions like diabetes and obesity are widespread . ( Arkansas is less healthy than all but three other states , according to annual rankings by the United Health Foundation . )
Other states that expect large increases in Medicaid enrollment , like Louisiana and Texas , are among the plaintiffs in the federal lawsuit . In Arkansas , by contrast , state officials accept the expansion of Medicaid .
“ Expansion of Medicaid will be a huge opportunity , a way to provide coverage for low-income citizens that we simply could not afford without federal financing , ” said Dr. Joseph W. Thompson , the surgeon general of Arkansas .
Arkansas officials want to expand insurance coverage while also taking steps to keep costs under control . They would pay doctors a lump sum for each “ episode of care , ” rather than a separate fee for each service .
The Census Bureau estimates that 500,000 people in Arkansas are uninsured . Half of them would be eligible for Medicaid under the new health care law .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
Arkansas officials expect the Medicaid rolls to grow by more than 35 percent , to 925,000 , from 675,000 . Here , as in other states , most of the new Medicaid beneficiaries are expected to be adults .
Arkansas has taken significant steps to insure more children in recent years , under Gov . Mike Beebe , a Democrat , and his predecessor , Mike Huckabee , a Republican , who signed a bill creating an insurance program for children in 1997 , five months before the federal program for children was established .
In the 15 years since then , the proportion of Arkansas children lacking coverage has been cut by more than half . But coverage of parents and other adults lags far behind . Some Arkansas adults have children covered by Medicaid or the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program but are themselves uninsured .
Heather D. Clubbs said that her children — a 14-year-old daughter and two sons , ages 8 and 15 — went regularly to doctors and dentists here for services covered by Medicaid . But Ms. Clubbs , who earns $ 9.71 an hour as a nurse ’ s aide at a nursing home , said she could not afford coverage for herself , which would take $ 200 a month out of her paycheck .
“ I would go to the doctor more often if I had health insurance , ” Ms. Clubbs said . “ I try not to go to the doctor at all . ”
Current Medicaid eligibility rules are notoriously complicated , and to qualify a person must fit into one of several dozen categories . “ It ’ s a very common misconception that Medicaid covers all poor people , but that ’ s far from the truth , ” Mr. Allison said .
In Arkansas , parents generally can not qualify for Medicaid if their family income is more than 25 percent of the poverty level ( in other words , more than $ 4,770 a year for a family of three ) , and childless adults generally can not qualify unless they are disabled .
The new health care law will simplify eligibility , sweeping away many of those categories in favor of a single standard . People under 65 will generally qualify for Medicaid if their income is less than or equal to 133 percent of the federal poverty level ( up to $ 25,390 for a family of three ) .
In addition to the costs , state officials here are not sure how they will cope with the expected surge in people eligible for Medicaid , given that doctors and nurses are scarce in some counties .
Dr. Steven F. Collier , the chief executive of a network of community health centers known as ARcare , said : “ The new health care law is a good thing . But if it is ruled constitutional , there will be some practical problems , and access to care is No . 1 . If you give people health insurance and they do not have access to a doctor or health care , what difference will that make ? ”
Darren Caldwell , chief executive of DeWitt Hospital in DeWitt , Ark. , said : “ I worry that the Medicaid card will be like Confederate money . You won ’ t have anywhere to use it , and it won ’ t be worth anything . ”
Sip B. Mouden , chief executive of Community Health Centers of Arkansas , whose members operate 75 clinics in the state , said : “ A lot of our community health centers are at capacity right now . An insurance card does not guarantee access to a regular source of primary and preventive care . ”
Arkansas , like many states , plans to train more doctors , physician assistants and other health care workers . But the supply is expected to fall short of the demand , and Dr. Daniel W. Rahn , chancellor of the University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences , said the state had not identified “ a revenue source to build that additional capacity . ”