When congressional Republicans began drafting health care legislation at the beginning of the year , critics worried that the result would not be the repeal and replace of Obamacare that the GOP had long promised . Instead , they warned , the Republican party was on track to produce something more aptly understood as `` Obamacare lite '' —a watered down version of the law that is already in place .
Partly this was for procedural reasons : Reconciliation , the budget maneuver which Republicans are relying on to pass a bill in the Senate with a simple majority vote , presents some procedural barriers to full repeal . But those worries also stemmed from long-simmering concerns that , despite having spent seven years campaigning on replacing the health care law , Republicans had developed no substantive health policy goals of their own .
This morning , after weeks of unusual secrecy , the Senate has finally released a draft version of the bill , dubbed the Better Care Reconciliation Act of 2017 . In the hours before the bill was made public , details began to leak , and a clear picture of the legislation has emerged . Although Senate Republicans had initially indicated that they would scrap the House bill and start from scratch , the Senate plan looks more than a little like its House counterpart , which kept much of Obamacare 's structure in place . But even more tellingly , the Senate plan looks even closer to the health care law that is already on the books .
In other words , it is exactly what critics predicted : a bill that , at least in the near term , retains weakened versions of nearly all of Obamacare 's core features while fixing few if any of the problems that Republicans say they want to fix . It is Obamacare lite—the health law that Republicans claim to oppose , but less of it . It represents a total failure of Republican policy imagination .
To understand the Senate plan , it helps to recall Obamacare 's underlying framework . The centerpiece of the law was a reform of the individual market , intended to give those who do not get coverage through work or a federal program access to subsidized , regulated coverage . The law created a new federal subsidy , based on income , for lower- and middle-income households to purchase health insurance . It set up federal rules requiring insurers to sell to all comers while limiting their ability to charge based on health history . It mandated that all individuals obtain health coverage or pay a tax penalty . And it erected a system of government-run health insurance exchanges on which consumers could purchase subsidized , regulated individual market coverage .
Those exchanges have never been fully stable as either business or policy propositions . Premiums have marched steadily upwards ; last year , the price of a typical plan rose by 22 percent , and early reports show large spikes coming this year as well . The non-profit health insurance organizations that Obamacare funded have mostly shut down . Large , for-profit health insurers , meanwhile , have lost money and either scaled back their participation or dropped out entirely .
Republicans have repeatedly criticized these marketplaces for being expensive and unstable . As Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , who spearheaded the drafting of this bill , likes to say , `` Obamacare is collapsing around us . ''
Yet even more than the House plan , the Senate plan retains the essential structure of Obamacare 's individual market reforms . It would likely result in fewer people being covered , and it would not stop the destabilization of the market .
Like the House plan , the Senate plan retains Obamacare 's major insurance regulations , including the requirement to cover pre-existing conditions , at the federal level . Unlike the House plan , it does not allow states to apply for a waiver to opt out of those rules . It also eliminates Obamacare 's health insurance mandate .
Every state that has attempted this combination of coverage regulations without a mandate has seen a swift meltdown in the individual market . There is every ███ to expect that the same would happen under the Senate plan , especially since Obamacare 's exchanges were struggling with a too-small , too-sick enrollee pool even with the mandate in place .
The Senate bill attempts to manage this instability by buying off health insurance companies with payments that Republicans previously argued were illegal and should be stopped .
The way it does this is by authorizing additional payments known as cost-sharing reduction ( CSR ) subsidies to insurers through 2019 . It also authorizes the back payment of any CSR subsidies that insurers have not recieved . On this front , it is actually an expansion of Obamacare , and it is a revealing sign of the shallowness of Republican thinking on health care policy .
The Obama administration initially requested congressional authorization to make the CSR payments , which are called for in Obamacare , but not explicitly appropriated . The House did not provide it . The administration then paid them anyway , believing that the exchanges would collapse without them . In response , House Republicans sued , arguing that only Congress has the power to appropriate funds . A federal judge agreed that the Obama administration was violating the constitutional separation of powers . The Trump administration has continued making the payments while threatening to withhold them , adding to the uncertainty for insurers operating in the exchanges .
Now Senate Republicans are proposing to explicitly authorize those payments for the first time . That means they are proposing to explicitly authorize and continue the very policy their House colleagues took the previous administration to court for pursuing . It amounts to an expansion of Obamacare , and while it may reduce uncertainty in some markets , it is unlikely to halt premium increases or fully stabilize the exchanges , which were degrading even before Trump threatened to withhold the payments . Moreover , it is an admission that Republicans do not believe they can meaningfully improve on the Obama administration 's implementation of the law .
That same inability to move beyond the core structure of Obamacare is also apparent in the design of the Senate plan 's insurance subsidies .
The House version of the AHCA provided subsidies based on age . But the Senate version relies on income-based subsidies , just like Obamacare—but a little less generous . Currently , Obamacare provides subsidies for individual up to 400 percent of the poverty line , or about $ 98,000 a year for a family of four . Starting in 2020 , the Senate bill would ratchet that back to 350 percent of the poverty line , or about $ 86,000 for the same family . In addition , reports indicate that the subsidies are pegged to lower-cost plans , which means the subsidies will be smaller , and will likely lead to more plans with high deductibles .
Taken on its own terms , this scheme undercuts the GOP 's complaints that Obamacare hurts the middle class . In addition to the higher deductibles , it creates a subsidy cliff for middle-class families purchasing health insurance on the individual market . Those who earn slightly too much to qualify for a subsidy would have to pay full price for health coverage that is increasingly expensive .
More generally , it represents a failure to think beyond the confines of the law that is already in place . At a fundamental level , the Senate plan accepts Obamacare 's premises about the nature of health insurance and the individual market . It works from the assumption that the only way to make expensive health insurance cheaper is to subsidize it through the federal government . It is a plan that subsidizes , and therefore disguises , unaffordability , rather than attempting to bring down costs directly .
Perhaps the Senate bill 's biggest departure from Obamacare is the way it would handle Medicaid . Like the House bill , the Senate plan would slowly roll back Obamacare 's Medicaid expansion over a period of years , converting Medicaid into a per-capita system in which federal matching funds are allocated on a per-person basis . It would delay the start of the phase out until 2021 , scaling back funding for expansion enrollees a little more each year . In addition , starting in 2025 , it would place a stricter cap on the growth of Medicaid spending than the House bill , limiting it to general inflation rather than medical inflation . In the long term , then , the Senate bill 's Medicaid cuts would be much deeper .
But even this suggests a resistance to act outside of the parameters already set by Obamacare . Not only is the phase-out slow , but the delays mean that it is susceptible to political reversals . As conservative health policy analyst Chris Jacobs wrote recently , any Medicaid rollback that is delayed until after 2020 essentially requires a Republican president to go into effect . The growth cap , meanwhile , is unlikely to happen unless a Republican wins the White House in 2024 . The Medicaid provisions , like much of the bill , appear designed to frustrate nearly everyone . Backers of the expansion oppose the cuts , while critics will worry that they wo n't happen at all .
The Medicaid provisions—and in particular the altered growth cap—may be best understood as budget gimmicks . On paper , the rollback reduces federal spending , generating estimates of budget savings inside the 10 year window that the Congressional Budget Office uses to score legislation . Those budget savings are necessary for Republicans to use the reconciliation process , but they assume that in the future , Congress will not reverse course . Given that many Republicans from Medicaid expansion states are wary of the rollback , and Democrats universally oppose it , this is far from certain .
Indeed , one of the most striking features of the Senate plan is how many of its major provisions are delayed for years . The CSR subsidies that are now being paid on a month-to-month basis by the Trump administration would continue through 2019 . The adjustments to the individual market subsidies would not start until 2020 . The Medicaid expansion rollback also would not begin until 2021 , and the growth cap would not kick in until 2025 .
These delays mean that the current high levels of political uncertainty surrounding Obamacare and the individual market would last for years , through the next two elections and beyond . It is not too hard to imagine some or all of these provisions being delayed further , or even becoming kicked down the road on a semi-permanent basis , as the tweak to physician Medicare reimbursement known as the doc fix was for more than a decade . That , in turn , could result in a health care system that is wracked by permanent instability and uncertainty—one that is always about to change , according to the law , but never or rarely does .
That sort of environment would satisfy almost no one . It would cause headaches for both providers and patients , while making product policy reforms even more difficult , as lawmakers constantly debate changes scheduled to go into effect rather than improvements they would like to see . It would prolong and exacerbate the political squabbling over health care rather than settle it .
For Republicans , this might be the notable failure to think beyond the terms set by Obamacare . It means that Senate bill not only wo n't be Obamacare repeal , it might not even be Obamacare lite . Instead , it might be Obamacare lite—later . And later could easily turn out to be never .