Obamacare premiums are on track to rise faster than ever before in 2017 .
The Obama administration released data Monday showing that premiums for midlevel plans will rise , on average , 22 percent between 2016 and 2017 .
Yes , that is a huge increase . Last year premiums went up by 7.5 percent .
Premiums are rising on the Obamacare marketplaces largely because the people who signed up for coverage were sicker than the insurance companies expected . This led some health insurers ( like Aetna and UnitedHealth ) to leave the marketplace . The insurance companies that stayed behind realized they ’ d have to charge higher premiums in order to cover their members ’ medical bills .
What does this mean for Obamacare customers ? Most Obamacare enrollees ( 83 percent ) receive subsidies that limit the amount they have to spend on premiums . They only have to spend a certain percent of their income , and then the government will cover the rest .
These people will likely be somewhat insulated from the premium increases . But the premium hike could still be disruptive . These people might have to switch to a new plan if another insurer is offering a lower premium than the one they currently use .
But another 17 percent of Obamacare enrollees don ’ t receive premium subsidies . And these people are going to be in a really tough spot . They ’ ll need to decide whether they want to continue spending more to buy their same coverage — or if the insurance doesn ’ t provide enough value at the higher price .
What does this mean for the future of the law more generally ? That ’ s really hard to tell right now — but there seems to be two plausible interpretations of the data .
One is that this is a one-time course correction . When Obamacare launched , premiums were much lower than analysts had expected . Insurance plans are now bringing their premiums more in line with expectations , and after they do that , they won ’ t have to make these big rate increases again .
The other is that this is the start of a series of higher rate increases for the health care law — that these new , high premiums might encourage some healthy people ( especially those without subsidies ) to leave the individual market . Subsides act as a powerful counter-balance to this second scenario , though , by capping enrollees ’ contributions .
In either case , these numbers are bad news for Obamacare — we just don ’ t know how bad , exactly , the news is at this point .