WASHINGTON — President Trump is preparing to deliver a long-awaited address on prescription drug prices as soon as next week , but advocates warn the White House may be focused more on populist messaging than swallowing bitter pills .
Trump lamented the rising cost of drugs during his campaign and last year he accused pharmaceutical companies of “ getting away with murder. ” He blasted other countries for controlling prices and vowed to the cost of drugs in the U.S. “ way down . ”
But based on more recent statements from the president as well as remarks made by members of his administration — many of whom previously worked for drug companies — few expect Trump to offer up major changes in the address .
“ We are not hopeful , but we ’ d love to be wrong , ” said Peter Maybarduk , director of Public Citizen 's Global Access to Medicines Program . “ The signals are pointing mostly in the wrong direction . ”
. @ Merck Pharma is a leader in higher & higher drug prices while at the same time taking jobs out of the U.S. Bring jobs back & LOWER PRICES ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) August 14 , 2017
Studies show the increase in drug prices are having a big impact on American households . An AARP report last year found the average annual price of drugs widely prescribed to seniors increased to $ 12,951 from $ 6,425 five years ago .
Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar , a former executive at drug maker Eli Lilly , said this week that Trump wants to go “ much further ” on the issue , but offered few specifics . An unpublished proposal on drug pricing recently submitted to the White House by HHS was marked as having little economic impact , an indication the administration is not contemplating fundamental changes .
The White House had previously said Trump would use the speech to ask HHS for ideas to address the problem . The speech was scheduled for April 26 but was delayed when Azar was hospitalized with diverticulitis . A White House spokesman did not respond to questions about the contents of the upcoming address , or its timing .
“ I ’ m not expecting significant changes , ” said Rachel Sachs , a Washington University law professor who blogs about drug policies . “ One of the things to watch for in the speech is what the administration says it can do on its own and what it needs Congress ’ help with . ”
Trump has already put pressure on the drug industry in ways that even some critics have applauded . The Food and Drug Administration has sped up approval of generic drugs , injecting more competition in the market . The president ’ s proposed budget floated the idea of giving some states leverage to negotiate prices in Medicaid .
And the White House has proposed requiring pharmacy benefit managers , which act as middlemen between drug companies and insurers , to pass along to Medicare beneficiaries the savings they negotiate by buying large quantities of drugs . That idea wouldn ’ t lower the price of medicine , but it could reduce out-of-pocket costs for patients .
The administration has also been scrutinizing lower prices paid in other countries , a favorite issue for the president . White House economic advisers recommended this year that the administration use `` enhanced trade policy '' to pressure other nations against negotiating prices that are far lower than what U.S. patients and insurers will pay .
Analysts say many of those proposals could have an impact , but they will take time to implement — and may affect a small number of patients .
What the president is unlikely to do is allow Medicare to negotiate drug prices . Trump embraced that idea during the presidential campaign but has not pursued it since taking office . Azar said this year that allowing negotiations would limit the choice of drugs available to seniors .
Less clear is whether the administration will step up enforcement of anti-competitive practices . In the case of price gouging , for instance , federal law allows the government to override patent protection in exchange for compensation . The Bush administration came under pressure to consider that move with the anti-anthrax treatment Cipro in 2001 , but drug maker Bayer decided to voluntarily reduce its price instead .
FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb has hinted that Trump 's address will focus at least in part on those practices . Gottlieb told a conference in Washington on Thursday that the administration wants to `` dismantle many of the provisions that shield parts of the drug industry from more vigorous competition . ''
More : Drug prices must come down if copay help is n't the answer , experts agree
More : Drug co-pay groups : Critical patient charities or fronts for drugmakers ?
Trump ’ s rhetoric on drug prices has reflected public apprehension on the issue . Just more than half of Americans believe passing legislation to address drug prices should be a “ top priority ” for Washington , according to a Kaiser Health Tracking Poll in March .
And the added pressure from the White House has also intensified finger pointing within the labyrinth of industries involved in prescriptions . Pharmaceutical companies blame insurers and pharmacy benefit managers . Those groups counter that it is the drug makers that decide how much to charge for their product .
“ The problem is the price , ” said Will Holley , a spokesman for the Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing , which represents insurers and large PBMs such as CVS Health . “ At the end of the day there ’ s one player that sets the price of drugs . ”
Holly Campbell , a spokeswoman for the trade group Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America , said patients are struggling to afford medicine `` because insurers and PBMs have been shifting more of the costs to them for years . ''
Drug prices , she said , grew relatively slowly in 2017 `` while patients ' out-of-pocket costs continue to skyrocket . ''