To people in other nations , the US debate over health-care reform , including the recent federal government “ shutdown , ” must have been bewildering . Such dismay is augmented by the fact that the Obamacare website , Healthcare.gov , has experienced a very traumatic birth , with fewer than 1 in 100 people who visit it actually managing to enroll in the new programs . The government is responding with a “ tech surge ” .
Some consequences of Obamacare are more local . My university just terminated 50 employees to avoid costs associated with the new law . Those who lost their jobs were maintenance and custodial workers , for whom the university would have been obliged to provide health insurance or face fines that can range up to $ 3,000 per worker . As is so often the case , federal legislation intended to help the less fortunate has turned out to harm some of those it sought to aid . Yet more dismay .
Part of the explanation for these problems is the extraordinary complexity of the law , which is often poorly understood even by those who are attempting to implement it . Signed into law as the Affordable Care Act in March 2010 , Obamacare represents the most sweeping US healthcare legislation since the creation of Medicare and Medicaid , which fund care for the elderly and the poor , in 1965 . In total , the Affordable Care Act runs to more than 10,500 pages .
Why is Obamacare so complex ? Proponents point out that short of creating a new federal healthcare system , any US attempt to insure the uninsured would inevitably prove highly complicated . Unlike most other industrialized nations , the US healthcare system relies primarily on employer-based insurance , instead of a government-financed system . And insurance is regulated by the 50 states . So Obamacare inevitably represents the application of a new patch to an already complex patchwork .
The law actually has three primary purposes : to lower the numbers of uninsured , make care more affordable to those who need it , and reduce health-care costs . Such objectives are difficult to argue with , particularly in a nation that leads the industrialised world in the percentage of its citizens who can not afford care , yet which spends far more per capita on healthcare than any other nation – 18 percent of GDP , while for other comparable nations the number is less than 12 percent .
But the controversy and fierce antagonism surrounding Obamacare are nothing new in the United States . In the US system , the legislative branch makes and funds laws , while the executive branch bears the responsibility of implementing them . The founders of the US system of government , men such as Alexander Hamilton and James Madison , envisioned a system of checks and balances , in which each of the three branches of government ( judiciary included ) would impede the will of the other .
Some Americans look around the country and see many disadvantaged people unable to obtain and pay for adequate medical care . Moved by the suffering of their neighbors , they naturally think there ought to be a law ensuring that everyone has access to care . Others see vast inefficiencies in health care , and believe steps must be taken to reign in the huge increases in health-care costs that the US traditionally experiences each year . Such people are likely to support Obamacare .
But other Americans look around and see a bloated federal government choking the US economy and infringing on economic and political liberties . They believe Washington has become too influential already , and federal programs such as Obamacare only increase the reach of an already intrusive government . They worry the US is becoming a “ nanny state ” , where people look to the government to solve their problems .
If you want a federal government that is united , efficient , and nimble , then the US Constitution makes no sense . On the other hand , if you believe social good can not or should not be provided by the federal government , and that far from maximizing the government ’ s ability to provide benefits the most important function of the Constitution is to prevent government ’ s excessive expansion , the current political climate may seem less perverse .
Those who expect the government to do more to help those in need look on the current Washington political climate as dysfunctional , heaping blame on those obstructing the compassionate will of the people to do more to help the disadvantaged . Those who believe that the government is doing too much already and instead needs to be trimmed back regard the same impasses with satisfaction , believing that they further tarnish an overweening government ’ s reputation .
In short , the bewildering US healthcare debate , including the government shut down , isn ’ t quite as incomprehensible as it first appears . Americans are not united in a desire for more and better government , including federally mandated health care . Many Americans actually want less government , and they are willing to use whatever means they have at their disposal to thwart what they see as an un-Constitutional and even un-American expansion of government ’ s reach . Health care is just the latest issue to get in the middle of a centuries-old argument .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Richard Gunderman is professor of radiology , pediatrics , medical education , philosophy , liberal arts , and philanthropy at Indiana University , where he also serves as vice chair of Radiology . Among other awards , he received the 2012 Robert Glaser Award , the highest teaching award of the Association of American Medical Colleges . His most recent books are “ Leadership in Healthcare ” ( Springer 2009 ) and X-ray Vision ( Oxford 2013 ) .
Mr. Gunderman does not work for , consult to , own shares in , or receive funding from any company or organization that would benefit from this article , and has no relevant affiliations .