Instead of a Graham-Cassidy health care bill , might we end up with ... Trump-Schumer ?
At long last , President Donald Trump is now saying he ’ s ready to work with Democrats on health care . He confirmed in a Saturday morning tweet that he called Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer Friday “ to see if the Dems want to do a great HealthCare Bill . ”
I called Chuck Schumer yesterday to see if the Dems want to do a great HealthCare Bill . ObamaCare is badly broken , big premiums . Who knows ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 7 , 2017
The tweet confirms a Friday night report of the Trump-Schumer phone call by Jonathan Swan of Axios , who heard of the information from worried Republican sources . Schumer released a statement Saturday saying that , on the call , he told Trump that “ repeal and replace ” was off the table , and suggested starting instead with a bill to stabilize the current system .
The news fits into a pattern of recent attempts by Trump to deal with Schumer and Speaker Nancy Pelosi after frustration with his own party ’ s failures . In early September , the president simply agreed to Schumer and Pelosi ’ s preferences on how to fund the government and raise the debt ceiling . Soon afterward , Trump met with Schumer and Pelosi privately to discuss a deal on protecting the DREAMers — though no deal has been finalized .
But this brief boom of bipartisanship was derailed later in September , as Senate Republicans tried yet again to pass Obamacare repeal along partisan lines , this time with the Graham-Cassidy bill .
That effort failed , and Republicans ’ ability to use the special “ budget reconciliation ” process for Obamacare repeal expired as of September 30 . And while it ’ s possible the GOP could make another try at a reconciliation health bill , for now the party appears to be focused on tax reform — meaning any health care bill would need 60 votes to advance through the Senate .
Republicans have suggested that , once they get tax reform done , they ’ ll take yet another shot at a partisan Obamacare repeal effort through reconciliation . And President Trump himself repeatedly made the bizarre and seemingly untrue claim that he already had secured enough Republican votes to pass a bill and simply hadn ’ t done so because of a senator ’ s illness . ( This claim puzzled much of Washington , and seems best explained as Trump trying to avoid looking like a failure . )
With one Yes vote in hospital & very positive signs from Alaska and two others ( McCain is out ) , we have the HCare Vote , but not for Friday ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) September 27 , 2017
In any case , it ’ s hard to know whether Republicans will get another opportunity . Tax reform could take longer than expected , and the Republican “ no ” votes in the Senate against the GOP ’ s effort haven ’ t yet budged . Plus , the expected arrival of Roy Moore to the chamber after December ’ s special election in Alabama could make the votes for repeal even tougher for Mitch McConnell to wrangle , since Moore has promised to oppose any bill that wouldn ’ t fully repeal Obamacare .
So it makes sense that , with nothing else going for him on health care at the moment , Trump has called up Schumer to talk a deal . And a deal isn ’ t impossible to imagine , considering Trump seems to lack any specific policy preferences on health care , and occasionally has sounded like a Democrat when discussing the issue ( promising to cover everyone and not to cut Medicare or Medicaid ) . Whether Congressional Republicans would go along with a Trump-Schumer health care deal , though , is more uncertain .
For his part , Schumer released a statement stressing that he and Democrats would be happy to talk about how “ to improve the existing health care system , ” though not “ repeal. ” He added : “ A good place to start might be the Alexander-Murray negotiations that would stabilize the system and lower costs . ”
By this Schumer is referring to talks that have been taking place between Sen. Lamar Alexander ( R-TN ) and Sen. Patty Murray ( D-WA ) on a bill to stabilize the individual marketplaces . Again , though , whether anti-Obamacare House Republicans in particular will pass a bill to shore up the program remains uncertain .