President Trump on Tuesday will personally urge House Republicans to rally behind legislation to repeal and replace Obamacare , as GOP leaders dig in for a three-day push that could make or break the White House ’ s agenda moving forward .
Mr. Trump , who frequently boasts about his negotiating skills , will head to the Capitol to lobby conservatives who say the plan doesn ’ t go far enough , and centrists who ’ ve demanded more help for older Americans whose premiums would rise under the GOP plan .
House Republicans late Monday said they would set aside at least $ 75 billion to help people who buy insurance on their own but aren ’ t quite old enough for Medicare , the popular program for seniors , as party leaders scrounge up the 216 GOP votes needed to pass the bill during a floor vote scheduled for Thursday .
Their amended bill doesn ’ t actually beef up the tax credits for Americans aged 50 to 64 — it simply leaves room for the Senate to do it — though it formalizes agreed-upon changes to Medicaid designed to reel in a vital bloc of conservatives .
“ This is our long-awaited chance to finally get rid of Obamacare , ” Mr. Trump said at a rally in Kentucky , home to a pair of vocal GOP opponents of the bill in Rep. Thomas Massie and Sen. Rand Paul .
Mr. Trump said he ’ s willing to work with Mr. Paul on necessary changes to get the health bill done and then move on tax reform .
The House Freedom Caucus , a group of 30-plus Republicans that frequently spars with leadership , remains the most visible impediment to the bill in the lower chamber . Its chairman , Rep. Mark Meadows of North Carolina , said the group didn ’ t plan on taking an official position on the bill late Monday , leaving the door open to arm-twisting from Mr. Trump and GOP leadership , though members say the votes simply aren ’ t there .
“ They haven ’ t changed the bill ’ s general framework . They don ’ t have the votes to pass it . They have seriously miscalculated , ” Rep. Justin Amash , Michigan Republican , said on Twitter .
House Speaker Paul D. Ryan and his chief aides have a lot riding on Mr. Trump ’ s role as the ultimate “ closer , ” from fulfilling their seven-year pledge to kill Obamacare to maintaining enough momentum to overhaul the tax code before the summer recess .
“ These next few days could define us for years to come . We ran for Congress to do big things and save our country from leftist progressivism , ” House Majority Whip Steve Scalise said late Sunday in a letter to his whip team . “ We ran for Congress to seize the opportunity and achieve the promise that the American people have bestowed upon us . ”
Republicans can ’ t lose more than 21 GOP votes , because every Democrat is expected to reject the bill that repeals most of Obamacare ’ s taxes and its individual mandate , replaces the ACA ’ s generous subsidies with refundable , age-based tax credits and reins in and caps spending on Medicaid by 2020 .
A “ manager ’ s amendment ” submitted late Monday would repeal many of Obamacare ’ s taxes sooner — this year instead of 2018 — while barring any more states from expanding their Medicaid populations and receiving generous federal matching funds outlined by the 2010 law .
The implementation of the so-called “ Cadillac tax ” on particularly generous employer plans is moved back from 2025 to 2026 .
Democrats said they ’ ve invited their own cheerleader to the Capitol , former Vice President Joseph R. Biden , to rally in defense of Obamacare Wednesday , saying the GOP bill would fully unwind its extension of coverage to more than 20 million Americans .
The House Rules Committee will meet early Wednesday to vet final changes to the GOP replacement and set the terms of debate for floor votes Thursday — the seventh anniversary of Obamacare ’ s passage . Republicans in the Senate are already mulling its own changes , however , so the House would likely have to revisit the plan down the road .
As written , the Congressional Budget Office estimated the plan would save more than $ 300 billion but result in an eye-popping 24 million fewer people being insured a decade from now .
Criticism of the plan continued to pour in Monday , as doctors ’ groups and America ’ s Catholic bishops said there were laudable parts of the legislation but that it fell woefully short in maintaining coverage for needy Americans .
Republican leaders have pleaded with conservatives and outside lobbies to give them more time . They say the bill , which leverages budget rules to avoid a Democratic filibuster later on , is simply the first part of a three-pronged strategy to bring health costs down . Phase two involves regulatory action by the Trump administration , while phase three would require Democratic support for future GOP legislation .
Mr. Trump reeled in members of the Republican Study Committee by agreeing Friday to amendments that would make changes to Medicaid , the insurance program for the poor .
The changes would allow states to impose work requirements on able-bodied people in the program and let governors accept a block grant of federal funding for the program instead of a per-capita allotment .