( ███ ) - The Trump administration took a step Wednesday toward allowing importation of medicines from Canada , an action the president has advocated as a way to bring cheaper prescription drugs to Americans , but the pharmaceutical industry was quick to resist the move .
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) said it and the Food and Drug Administration will propose a rule that will allow it to authorize states and other groups to pursue pilot projects related to importing drugs from Canada .
The agency also said it would allow drugmakers to bring drugs that they sell more cheaply in foreign countries into the United States for sale here , an option the companies are unlikely to embrace .
Capital Alpha analyst Rob Smith , in a research note , questioned why manufacturers would voluntarily lower prices in the United States to match those in Canadian or any other foreign country .
The announcement comes as President Donald Trump aims to address the world ’ s highest drug prices ahead of the 2020 elections and after several high-profile policy failures .
███ has previously reported that the administration is considering broadening its plans to link the cost of some drugs for the government Medicare program to an international pricing index .
Trump also supports bipartisan drug pricing legislation designed to force pharmaceutical companies to give discounts when drug prices rise more than inflation .
Another piece of bipartisan legislation aimed at prices of drugs developed using federal research funds was introduced on Wednesday by Republican Senator Rick Scott and Senator Chris Van Hollen , a Democrat .
The importation idea still needs to be proposed and then finalized by Health and Human Services . The largest U.S. pharmaceutical and biotech companies said they opposed the idea of importation through their lobbyists PhRMA and BIO .
“ There is no way to guarantee the safety of drugs that come into the country , ” PhRMA Chief Executive Officer Stephen Ubl said .
Drug industry shares were slightly higher , with the NYSE Arca Pharmaceutical Index up 0.13 percent versus a broader flat market .
HHS Secretary Alex Azar said he has had prior discussion with Canada about importation and that it would be up to the states , pharmacies and distributors , who are expected to pursue the importation through trial models , to navigate the issues .
“ There are hurdles of course , but the hurdles now are known . They are being laid out and they are surmountable , ” Azar told reporters on a conference call .
The Canadian health minister ’ s office said in a statement that it will work to understand the implications for Canadians and to ensure it does not negatively affect supply or cost .
Earlier this month , Health Canada said the U.S. market is too large to rely on Canadian imports as a solution to the high cost of drugs .
Any implementation is still far away given the technical steps of rule making and that the proposals will face challenges , Evercore ISI analysts Ross Muken and Michael Newshel said in a research note . For instance , they said , while Democrats like importation , most Republicans in Congress oppose it .
Senate Democrats reacted with caution to the Trump administration moves toward allowing importation of medicines from Canada . “ We have to look at the details of this plan to see if it amounts to much , ” said Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer .
The first part of the proposal would allow states , wholesalers or pharmacists to submit plans for pilot projects for Canadian drugs if their raw materials are manufactured in the same plant as the U.S. version . It would exclude biologics , infused drugs , injected drugs and inhaled drugs for surgery .
The Trump Administration has had setbacks in efforts to bring down drug prices . Its plan to make drugmakers disclose list prices in TV ads had to be scrapped after the companies won a legal challenge , and it abandoned efforts to force pharmacy benefit managers to pass discounts onto Medicare recipients .