So much for President Obama ’ s convoluted announcement that offered home remedies for the big ills of health care reform , plus a one year sign-up reprieve for those who have lost their insurance . For a president who enjoys golf , the big news teed up Republican outrage to perfection . Oh , the irony .
Take Rep. Steve Scalise of Louisiana , for example . He is chairman of the Republican Study Group , which offered its own alternative health care reform bill way back in September .
“ His hollow press conference was like a person who burned down your house , later showing up with an empty bucket and talking about how inadequate your house was before the fire , ” Mr. Scalise says .
“ President Obama needs to admit that Obamacare can not be fixed . Pointing fingers and claiming ignorance is not leadership , ” says House Majority Leader Eric Cantor of Virginia .
“ This is a staggering display of a reckless president cavalierly instructing states to ignore federal law , ” declares Texas Gov . Rick Perry , himself in presidential posturing mode , and irked that Mr. Obama suggests remedies at the state level .
“ President Obama did succeed at one thing today — making a bad situation worse with a fix that will create more confusion for consumers and threatens to destabilize the health insurance industry , ” Mr. Perry adds .
Still , some have advice for the Grand Old Party . Forget cozy compromise . “ Bullied Republicans must insist on repeal and resist the pitfall of becoming part of a phony fix , ” Rush Limbaugh told his audience in the aftermath of the president ’ s press conference .
“ If you think that this has the potential of waking people up to the horrors of liberalism and voting Democrat , then the last thing you ’ d want to do is help fix it , ” Mr. Limbaugh advised Republican lawmakers .
“ Think of a belt and suspenders . Do any of you wear a belt and suspenders ? What the president will put forth will be one , and what we will put forth will be the other , and everything will be under control . ”
— House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , explaining the working of an independent Democratic “ fix ” for the healthcare reform law during a press conference , the details to be revealed Friday .
“ The Democratic National Committee says it is eager and proud to run on Obamacare in 2014 . We ’ re wondering if their TVs are working . Note to the DNC : Obama ’ s track record hasn ’ t been to pivot when things are going well . You might want to check with your 2014 candidates before doubling down on ObamaCare . ”
Meanwhile , there ’ s a cultural moment . As far as the Obamacare goes , Americans trust information from Fox News more than President Obama . No , really . A new poll from YouGov finds that Fox News leads the list of most-trusted sources for health care news , followed by “ friends and family , ” Mr. Obama , National Public Radio , “ your personal insurance company , ” local TV news and , wonder of wonders — “ Republicans in Congress . ”
Consider that “ Obama administration officials ” ranks 13th while “ Democrats in Congress ” follows in 14th place . The other news networks were scattered throughout the lengthy list . The poll of 1,000 U.S. adults was conducted Nov. 6 and 7 .
Stand clear , now . Here comes “ Mansfield ’ s Book of Manly Men : An Utterly Invigorating Guide to being Your Most Masculine Self , ” by one Stephen Mansfield . Due from publisher Thomas Nelson on Tuesday , the book has received accolades from none other than Lt. Gen. William G. Boykin , the former commander of Delta Force .
“ The Western world is in a crisis of discarded honor , dubious integrity , and faux manliness . It is time to recover what we have lost , ” Mr. Mansfield proclaims . He also wrote “ The Faith of George W. Bush ” and “ Lincoln ’ s Battle with God ” among other books .
“ My goal in this book is simple . I want to identify what a genuine man does — the virtues , the habits , the disciplines , the duties , the actions of true manhood — and then call men to do it , ” the author adds .
He is weary of man-bashing culture like demeaning commercials and sitcoms , and he seeks to school younger gents in authentic manliness , lest they become isolated , by emphasizing “ more doing , less talking . ”
The thoughtful Mr. Mansfield also has supplied a list of 10 essential movies for manly men . They are : “ Seabiscuit , ” “ Chariots of Fire , ” “ The Pursuit of Happy-ness , ” “ It ’ s a Wonderful Life , ” “ Dead Poets Society , ” “ Apollo 13 , ” “ The King ’ s Speech , ” “ Men of Honor , ” “ Hoosiers ” and “ The Last Samurai . ”
Now open at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley , Calif. , it ’ s “ SPY : The Secret World of Espionage , ” an exhibit that includes never before seen objects and documents from the CIA , KGB , FBI , National Reconnaissance Office and the “ clandestine world of spies. ” The collection of 300 items includes eavesdropping bugs , concealed cameras , a Soviet poison dart umbrella and Reagan ’ s original leather binder for intelligence briefings .
Also on the tour : interactive secret writing devices , disguises , voice changers , a laser maze and “ on-the-spot training for future spies , ” organizers say .
A public Spy Lunch scheduled for Wednesday , incidentally , includes “ Covert Salad ” with fancy ranch dressing , a “ CIA Entree ” consisting of rosemary chicken and roasted potatoes plus “ Espionage Cake , ” which has much to do with chocolate and raspberry .
• 86 percent of U.S. voters say “ elected officials in Washington ” add to the nation ’ s problems ; 93 percent of Republicans and 78 percent of Democrats agree .
• 9 percent overall say the officials are helping solve the problems ; 5 percent of Republicans and 14 percent of Democrats agree .
• 65 percent overall say Congress should continue to investigate the Benghazi terrorist attacks ; 83 percent of Republicans and 46 percent of Democrats agree .
• 63 percent overall are worried about their personal health care in the future ; 87 percent of Republicans and 38 percent of Democrats agree .
• 51 percent overall say President Obama “ spends too much time blaming others ” for problems that arise ; 80 percent of Republicans and 20 percent of Democrats agree .
• 46 percent overall say the U.S. should “ throw out ” health care reform law and start over ; 72 percent of Republicans and 19 percent of Democrats agree .
• 42 percent overall say we should “ keep trying to fix it ” ; 21 percent of Republicans and 66 percent of Democrats agree .
Source : A Fox News poll of 1,006 registered U.S. voters conducted Nov. 10 to 12 .