President Obama needs to rebuild confidence in the law . | REUTERS W.H . back to Obamacare sales mode
President Barack Obama will launch a coordinated campaign Tuesday by the White House , congressional Democrats and their outside allies to return attention to why the Affordable Care Act passed in the first place .
After two months of intense coverage of the botched HealthCare.gov rollout , the president will host a White House event kicking off a three-week drive to refocus the public on the law ’ s benefits , senior administration officials told ███ .
The White House will take the lead in emphasizing a different benefit each day until the Dec. 23 enrollment deadline for Jan. 1 coverage . The daily message will be amplified through press events and social media by Democratic members of Congress , the Democratic National Committee , congressional campaign committees and advocacy organizations , officials said .
The fresh push is an attempt to get back to the game plan that Democrats wanted to pursue before the faulty website forced them into full-time damage control . The president needs to rebuild confidence in the law among the public and his Democratic allies on Capitol Hill , who have threatened to roll back aspects of Obamacare if the insurance marketplace didn ’ t improve quickly — and refocus attention on what would be lost if it were repealed .
Now that the website appears to be mostly functional , the West Wing thinks it has the ability to return to sales mode .
“ Healthcare.gov met our self-imposed November 30th deadline and even as we continue to make improvements to the website , we ’ ll also remind the public about how the Affordable Care Act is already making a positive difference in the lives of millions of Americans today , ” said Josh Earnest , a White House spokesman . “ The benefits of these consumer protections will only accumulate in the weeks and months ahead . ”
( ███ Magazine : How the media missed the two biggest Obamacare screw-ups )
Obama won ’ t declare the website fixed during Tuesday ’ s event . White House officials acknowledge HealthCare.gov still isn ’ t working as smoothly as it should , and that this renewed messaging push will run alongside efforts to make further repairs to the insurance marketplace and to target key populations for enrollment .
But he will return to a theme he first pursued in October : Obamacare is more than a website .
“ What the White House is doing is what the White House had hoped they would spend the last two months doing , which is going out , selling the law , selling the benefits of the law , ” said a former Obama adviser who framed the shift as a sign of White House confidence . “ The fact that they feel comfortable doing that is a healthy sign for the president but also for the long-term benefits of Obamacare . ”
Republicans aren ’ t expected back down from their campaign to weaken the law , and officials said they have been preparing for the Democratic offensive .
“ Democrats will spend the next year promising to ‘ fix ’ ObamaCare , but they ’ ve already lost all credibility with voters , ” said Brad Dayspring , spokesman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee , which has already cut a web ad aimed at vulnerable Democrats that concludes with the message : “ They can ’ t be trusted to keep their promises . ”
The focus on Obamacare benefits is a political necessity for congressional Democrats , the large majority of whom will face voters in less than a year . Democrats wrote and passed the law in the face of unified Republican opposition , and if voters aren ’ t aware of the law ’ s upside — or can ’ t remember it amid all the problems with the rollout — Democrats will be holding onto an anchor rather than a buoy .
Democrats in the White House and on Capitol Hill say that in order to get back on offense on Obamacare , they have to draw a two-sided picture : Democrats delivering benefits on one side , and Republicans trying to deny them on the other . That , one party operative said , is what polling says will help them win . Instead , Democrats have spent the past two months blaming a president of their own party for the deficiencies of a law that they own .
Now , Democratic leaders are welcoming the renewed White House push .
“ The consequences of Republican repeal are exactly the case that we need to be making — because Republican repeal would take us backward to a broken system that hurts too many Americans — like forcing millions of seniors to pay $ 1,200 more for their prescription drugs , ” said Rep. Steve Israel ( D-N.Y. ) , chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee . “ Every poll tells us that when we make that case , voters choose Democrats . ”
On Wednesday , the White House and Democratic allies will focus on how Americans are paying less for preventative care under Obamacare . On Thursday , they ’ ll highlight that people with preexisting conditions can no longer be charged more or denied coverage . And on Friday , they ’ ll emphasize the slowing growth in health care costs .
” We are able to hit reset on the conversation , ” said Lori Lodes , senior vice president of the liberal Center for American Progress Action Fund . “ We have to make sure people understand how the law will benefit them . ”