That aggressive campaign , which produced numerous hearings on the attacks in Benghazi , Libya , as well as on I.R.S . scrutiny of conservative groups , is now increasingly consumed by the health care fight . House Republican leaders empowered four committees — oversight , Ways and Means , Energy and Commerce , and Education and the Workforce — to take the lead , with support from other panels , such as the Science and Homeland Security Committees , which have examined computer security .
Mr. Cantor and Representative Cathy McMorris Rodgers of Washington , another member of the Republican leadership , have also leaned on all 231 House Republicans . A 17-page “ House Republican Playbook ” walks members through “ messaging tools ” like talking points , social media tactics and “ digital fliers ” ; details lines of attack ; offers up a sample opinion article for local newspapers ; and provides an extensive timeline on the health care law and an exhaustive list of legislative responses that have gone nowhere .
A message of the week is presented to the Republican members at the beginning of each week , Ms. McMorris Rodgers said . A “ Call to Action ” email chain distributes relevant breaking news . A new website , gop.gov/yourstory , is collecting anecdotes from each member .
The goal , according to Ms. McMorris Rodgers , is to use all the “ Republican voices we have in the House , the media markets in all the districts we represent , to take our message all over the country . ”
To Democrats , especially in the White House , the power of the effort stems from using anecdotes to paint a fundamentally misleading picture .
“ There ’ s been so much noise and so much misinformation , and this incredible organized effort to block the notion that everybody should have affordable health care in this country , ” President Obama told supporters of the health care law this month , “ that I think it ’ s important for us to step back and take a look at what ’ s already been accomplished , because a lot of times it doesn ’ t make news . Controversies make news . ”
Republicans have gone to the floor of the House and the Senate to tell constituent stories of soaring premiums or yawning new deductibles . But on Wednesday , the White House Council of Economic Advisers released a report showing that health care spending had grown by 1.3 percent since 2010 , the year the health care law passed . That is the lowest rate on record for any three-year period and less than a third of the average since 1965 , according to the White House .