In an article in the New England Journal of Medicine , Bill Gates laid out a frightening scenario regarding future epidemics : “ We must prepare for future epidemics of diseases that may spread more effectively than Ebola. ” Gates , a businessman and philanthropist , challenged the world to learn from what happened with Ebola. “ There is a significant chance that an epidemic of a substantially more infectious disease will occur sometime in the next 20 years ; after all , we saw major epidemics during the 20th century , including the Spanish influenza epidemic of 1918-1919 and the ongoing pandemic of human immunodeficiency virus , ” Gates wrote in the New England Journal of Medicine . “ In fact , of all the things that could kill more than 10 million people around the world , the most likely is an epidemic stemming from either natural causes or bioterrorism. ” Gates said the world needs to look at future epidemics like war — a plan needs to be in place , including an organization to manage and coordinate responses. “ Despite efforts by the United States and a few other countries , there are still big holes in the world 's ability to respond to an epidemic , ” Gates wrote . “ Other countries may be more likely to step up if they see an overall plan and understand their role in it . We need a rigorous study of the cost of building a global warning and response system and a plan for contributions from various countries. ” Some disagreed with Gates ’ assessment that a problem lies with international response . Emmanuel d ’ Harcourt , senior health director of the International Rescue Committee , told NPR that while a global response system might be helpful , that ’ s not where the trouble is . `` Local preparedness and local response , '' d'Harcourt said . `` We know that in most disasters , not just epidemics , but all kinds of disasters , the people who are able to respond the earliest are local . If you have local preparedness , you do n't really get a major epidemic at all . `` A year after the Ebola outbreak began , cases continue in Sierra Leone and are on the rise in Guinea , the World Health Organization said .