WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - A proposal by U.S. Republicans to repeal and replace the Obamacare health insurance program suffered serious new setbacks within the party on Sunday , when Senator Ted Cruz expressed his opposition and Senator Susan Collins dug in with strong criticism of the legislation .
Two other Republican senators , John McCain and Rand Paul , already said last week they would vote against the so-called Graham-Cassidy bill . One more “ no ” vote among Republicans would effectively kill the party ’ s latest effort in their seven-year mission to overturn Obamacare , while dealing a new blow to President Donald Trump .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , a Republican , has said he “ intends ” to put the bill up for a vote this week , but he has withheld public comment over the past few days as some of his rank-and-file Republicans abandoned Trump .
Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin , interviewed on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union , ” reflected the uncertainty in the battle .
“ It is going to be very close . I hope it passes , ” he said .
Phil Novack , a spokesman for Cruz , confirmed that the Republican senator said at an event in Texas : “ Right now , they don ’ t have my vote , and I don ’ t think they have ( Senator ) Mike Lee ’ s vote , either . ”
Lee is a conservative Republican and close ally of Cruz . A spokesman for Lee said the senator wanted “ some technical changes ” to the legislation , but did not provide details . “ We haven ’ t committed to anything yet , ” Conn Carroll said in an email .
Politico reported that Cruz complained that the latest Obamacare repeal bill did not address his concerns about bringing down the costs of healthcare .
On Friday , news of McCain ’ s opposition sent shares of health insurance companies up . Centene ended 1.6 percent higher and Humana closed up 0.2 percent .
Trump has pressured his fellow Republicans for quick passage on what would be his first victory on major legislation . All Democrats are expected to vote against it .
But Collins , perhaps the most moderate of Republican senators , appeared poised to oppose her party ’ s latest replacement plan for the Affordable Care Act , former Democratic President Barack Obama ’ s signature legislative achievement .
She , along with McCain and Alaska Senator Lisa Murkowski , voted in July against an earlier version of Obamacare repeal .
“ It is very difficult for me to envision a scenario where I would end up voting for this bill , ” Collins said on CNN ’ s “ State of the Union ” on Sunday , two days after saying she was “ leaning against ” the legislation .
Collins said her concerns centered on the impact the legislation would have on the federal Medicaid program , which helps disabled children and low-income elderly people get healthcare .
The Senate , which Republicans control by 52-48 , faces a Saturday deadline for deciding on the bill under an expiring rule that lets the healthcare proposal pass with just a simple majority in the 100-member chamber , instead of the 60-vote threshold needed for most legislation .
Paul , interviewed on NBC ’ s “ Meet the Press , ” attacked the centerpiece of the Republican bill that would have the federal government basically turn the health insurance system over to states in the form of “ block grants . ”
“ They could remove the block grants from it , and we can vote on what we actually agree on , ” Paul said . “ I can ’ t in good conscience vote to keep all the spending . ”
Some key Senate Republicans were still pushing to forge ahead .
Senator Lindsey Graham , who is leading the charge on the latest version of Obamacare repeal , told ABC he believed he would have the votes to pass the legislation .
“ The only way you know how people will vote is you have the vote , ” he said .
Graham did not detail the path he sees to victory .