The United States needs 16,000 more primary care physicians to meet its current health care needs , a problem that will only get worse if nothing is done to accommodate millions of newly-insured residents under President Obama ’ s health care law in the coming decade , according to a Senate report released Tuesday .
Sen. Bernie Sanders , Vermont Democrat and chairman of the Subcommittee on Primary Health and Aging that released the findings , said one in five sick Americans visits an emergency room for care that should have been rendered by a primary care physician , an unfortunate trend that results in higher health care costs and poorer outcomes for patients .
The lack of primary care offices hits rural regions and low-income urban areas the hardest , and will turn into a crisis if lawmakers and the industry do not address the problem before the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act expands coverage to 30 million more Americans , Mr. Sanders said Tuesday at the outset of a hearing on the topic .
Medical school graduates have been flocking to lucrative specialty fields that will pay nearly $ 3 million more than primary care positions over the course of their careers , an attractive option to students who face an average of $ 160,00 in debt after medical school , Mr. Sanders said .
“ In simple terms , a specialist will make twice what a generalist makes … That is a huge problem , ” Fitzhugh Mullan , a professor of medicine and health policy at George Washington University , testified before Mr. Sanders ‘ subcommittee on Tuesday .
Mr. Sanders ‘ said some of the blame appears to rest with a board of 31 physicians who make reimbursement recommendations to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) , which private insurers frequently adopt as well .
The American Medical Association ’ s Relative Value Scale Update Committee , or RUC , is populated by many more specialists that primary care physicians , multiple witnesses said Tuesday .
“ Therefore , it should come as no surprise that it has accelerated higher payments — larger paychecks — to specialists over primary care doctors , ” Mr. Sanders ‘ report said .
In response , the AMA noted that two primary-care seats were added to the group last year .
The RUC ’ s chairwoman , Barbara Levy , said in an emailed statement they are “ an independent group of physicians from many specialties , including primary care , who use their expertise on caring for Medicare patients to provide input to CMS . ”
Mr. Sanders said United States ’ ratio of primary care doctors to specialists , at 30 percent to 70 percent , is out of sync with that of other countries .
And while the nation spends twice as much per capita on health care as any other country , “ our health care outcomes — in terms of life expectancy , infant mortality and disease prevention — are not particularly good in terms of international comparisons , ” Mr. Sanders said at the hearing .
Sen. Chris Murphy , Connecticut Democrat , said medical students tend to see primary care as less groundbreaking or prestigious than specialty fields , and Mr. Mulligan said professors tend direct brighter students toward specialty care .
“ That culture is toxic , ” the professor said , “ and it ’ s out there and we need to worry about it . ”