Much can and has been said about the Obama administration ’ s decision to delay a major component of its own law—the employer mandate—because of its economic effects , political ramifications , and the simple fact that businesses are having a hard time complying . Reps. Tim Griffin ( AR ) and Todd Young ( IN ) weighed in on the issue in the GOP ’ s weekly address today , and called on the administration to exempt all Americans from the law -- not just businesses .
“ Equal justice under the law is a basic , founding principle of our country , ” Griffin said , “ so whenever Washington helps businesses and ignores families and workers , Americans have a duty to speak up . ”
It ’ s not fair that the administration did not extend the same delay to hardworking taxpayers , because as Young notes , “ the law 's mandates are just as daunting for individuals . And they do n't have an army of lawyers , lobbyists and accountants at their disposal to make sense of it all ” —especially since another 145 pages of regulations were just added to the individual mandate . “ How are ordinary citizens supposed to keep up ? ”
In an attempt to address the concerns of worried Americans , House Republicans acted this week passing a bipartisan bill Griffin introduced authorizing Obama ’ s delay of the employer mandate . Additionally , the House approved Young ’ s bill , the Fairness for American Families Act , which extends the same relief to the rest of the country .
“ Unfortunately , many Democrats voted to stand with big business and against fairness for individuals and families , ” Young said . “ President Obama threatened to veto our proposals altogether . We take that to mean he thinks it 's fair to let businesses off the hook while leaving middle-class families in harm 's way . ”
In the name of fairness , however , Republicans are urging the president to reconsider his veto threat , and calling on Senate Democrats to vote on their proposals immediately .
“ Bottom line : The sooner we can delay , dismantle , and repeal the president 's health care law , the sooner we can get people back to work and focus on expanding opportunity for everyone , ” Young said .