Republican leaders faced an immediate backlash Thursday after revealing their Obamacare replacement bill , leaving campaign vows to repeal the 2010 health care law in doubt as the Senate pushes toward a showdown on the chamber floor next week .
The bill , announced by Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , softens the edges of an earlier House version that President Trump reportedly called “ mean . ”
The 142-page plan would extend the life of President Obama ’ s Medicaid expansion and offer more generous subsidies for the poor and those approaching retirement age . It removes Obamacare ’ s “ individual mandate ” and unwinds the health care exchanges , but it maintains the 2010 law ’ s guarantees that let young adults stay on their parents ’ plans and guarantees coverage despite pre-existing conditions .
“ Obamacare is a direct attack on the middle class , and American families deserve better than its failing status quo — they deserve better care , ” Mr. McConnell said as he went to the Senate floor to publicly announce the plan , which was drafted in secret .
Democrats uniformly oppose the bill , meaning Republicans can not lose more than two of their 52 members in a vote .
Yet four have already said they can ’ t vote for it , as it stands .
SEE ALSO : Cassidy : Republican health care bill should pass once concerns are addressed
Sens . Rand Paul of Kentucky , Ron Johnson of Wisconsin , Ted Cruz of Texas and Mike Lee of Utah said they opposed the draft legislation for a variety of reasons , but they are open to negotiation before the bill hits the floor .
Mr. Johnson said he feels rushed , while the others worry that they are turning the dials on Obamacare instead of fulfilling their pledge to kill it .
“ Somebody ’ s going to have to look at this bill and say we ’ re going to make it look more like repeal and less like we ’ re keeping Obamacare , ” Mr. Paul said .
Democrats , meanwhile , say the bill is still too much of a repeal and not enough of Obamacare . They have said they won ’ t cooperate until Republicans agree to keep the basic structure of the 2010 Affordable Care Act , then work on fixes .
“ We live in the wealthiest country on earth . We ’ re proud of it as we should be . But surely , we can do better than what the Republican health care bill promises , ” said Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat .
Democrats also have complained about the path of the bill , which Mr. McConnell wrote and which will head straight to the floor , bypassing the extensive committee process that characterized the Obamacare debate .
Mr. McConnell promised to wait for a Congressional Budget Office evaluation of the bill and said there will be a robust floor debate , including amendments .
“ It ’ s much better than Obamacare . I like this a lot better than the House bill , ” said Sen. David Perdue , Georgia Republican .
Others said they needed time to read the whole bill , though they felt the proposals were trending in the right direction .
From the White House , President Trump said the Senate ’ s health care bill is in good shape but needs a “ little negotiation . ”
The CBO is expected to release its score next week , detailing how the bill affects federal spending and health care coverage .
Its evaluation of the House bill , which passed that chamber last month , projected lower costs for most Americans but said the poor and those approaching retirement age would see premium hikes . Some 23 million fewer Americans would hold insurance a decade from now because Medicaid ’ s rolls would be cut and people would no longer be required by law to purchase insurance .
Senators tried to lower costs for the poor and older Americans , pegging tax credits for people who buy insurance on their own to their amount of income instead of just age . That cuts a middle ground between the House plan and Obamacare .
“ For example , the tax credits for older folks — people like me — are now age-adjusted and income-adjusted , so someone who is making $ 20,000 a year and 62 years old would be able to afford coverage under this , where under the [ House bill ] I think it was problematic if they could afford coverage , ” said Sen. Bill Cassidy , a Louisiana Republican and physician .
The plan also goes more slowly in curtailing Obamacare ’ s expansion of Medicaid , which the House plan froze in 2020 . The Senate bill would begin a gradual reduction in 2021 and return to pre-Obamacare levels in 2024 .
To placate fiscal hawks , the plan would allow Medicaid spending to rise at a slower rate than under the House version , starting in 2025 .
Republicans say reining in Medicaid spending will force states to focus on those who need it most , though moderates worry that the cuts will suddenly pull coverage from needy residents and cripple the fight against opioid addiction . The federal-state program covers 1 in 5 Americans , about half of U.S. births and two-thirds of nursing home residents .
A number of Republicans withheld judgment , saying they will go back and talk to their governors and state health care officials and see how the bill affects them .
“ At first glance , I have serious concerns about the bill ’ s impact on the Nevadans who depend on Medicaid , ” said Sen. Dean Heller , Nevada Republican and a key holdout .
He is considered one of the most vulnerable Republicans on an otherwise favorable Senate electoral map next year .
Another swing vote , Sen. Susan M. Collins of Maine , said the plan has pros and cons that deserve more scrutiny .
The bill would let states use Obamacare ’ s waiver system to drop aspects of the 2010 law , including its list of essential benefits that plans must cover . However , states can not let insurers deny people with pre-existing conditions or charge them more than healthy consumers , a concept known as “ community rating . ”
Mr. Cruz and Mr. Lee had been pushing to scrap more of the regulations on insurers , not less , and House conservatives who will revisit the final plan insisted on letting states waive community rating .
The bill does strip federal funding from Planned Parenthood , the country ’ s largest network of abortion clinics , making good on a Republican campaign pledge .
In a boon for insurers , Republicans said the bill would maintain through 2019 the cost-sharing payments to insurance companies that cover out-of-pocket health care expenses of the poor . Mr. Trump has threatened to withhold those payments .
The plan would repeal Obamacare ’ s taxes on health insurers , medical device makers and high earners , among others , prompting Democrats to blast it as a wealth transfer from the needy to those who are doing fine .
“ Let ’ s be very clear : Senate Republicans are paying for tax cuts for the wealthy with American lives , ” said Sen. Elizabeth Warren , Massachusetts Democrat .
Mr. Obama also weighed in to decry the changes to his signature law .
“ The Senate bill , unveiled today , is not a health care bill . It ’ s a massive transfer of wealth from middle-class and poor families to the richest people in America , ” Mr. Obama said on Facebook . “ It hands enormous tax cuts to the rich and to the drug and insurance industries , paid for by cutting health care for everybody else . ”
Republicans have described their repeal effort as a mission to rescue Americans from a law headed for failure . They point to rising premiums and dwindling choices , as insurers pull out of markets .
Sen. John Cornyn , Texas Republicans , said the cruelest lawmakers of all were Democrats defending the “ failed experiment ” of Obamacare .
“ They may not be willing to help , but we will , ” he said . “ And we will get it done and help the American people who are being hurt by the failure of Obamacare today . ”