Just as there was an uproar when some people found out last year that their policies had been canceled , individuals this year may be surprised to find that they could be asked to pay much more for the same plan because their carrier is raising its prices or the amount of the federal tax credit they will receive is changing .
People will be renewing at the same time that others are enrolling for the first time , starting a week and a half before Thanksgiving , on Nov. 15 . To ensure that they have a new plan by the beginning of the year , those who renew will have to sign up by Dec. 15 . Exactly how the renewal process will work has not yet been determined .
“ We ’ re still waiting on the details of the process , ” said Paula Steiner , chief strategy officer for Health Care Service Corporation , which offers Blue Cross plans in five states . “ We haven ’ t gone through any testing yet of any changes to the system for 2015 . ”
“ I think there ’ s a possibility that there ’ s equal or more confusion this fall , ” she said .
Those responsible for the federal marketplace say they are working hard to make the process as easy as possible . “ We ’ re putting in place the simplest path for consumers this year to renew their coverage , ” said Andrew Slavitt , principal deputy administrator for Medicare , which oversees the insurance marketplaces . Those who prefer to stay with the same plan will be able to renew their coverage automatically , as many do with employer coverage . People can renew by doing “ absolutely nothing , ” he said .
The federal online marketplace is being continuously improved , according to Mr. Slavitt , who said the government was updating the website to allow renewals . “ We ’ re in a very different position than we were last year , ” he said .
Compared with this year , from the 19 states for which information is available , 30 carriers have requested entrance into the marketplaces for 2015 and 1.6 times more plans are being offered , with prices for 2015 likely to remain varied , as they were the previous year , according to McKinsey & Company ’ s Center for US Health System Reform , which is analyzing the insurance filings as they become available . Prices are rising about 30 percent for some plans , while decreasing by the same amount for others , depending on the market and policy . “ We are definitely seeing a lot of volatility in pricing , ” said Erica Hutchins Coe , a McKinsey expert .