With the advent of the Affordable Care Act , the share of Americans convinced that health care is a right shrank from a majority to a minority .
This shift in public opinion is a major victory for the Republican Party . It is part of a larger trend : a steady decline in support for redistributive government policies . Emmanuel Saez , an economics professor at Berkeley and one of the nation ’ s premier experts on inequality , is a co-author of a study that confirms this trend , which has been developing over the last four decades . A separate study , “ The Structure of Inequality and Americans ’ Attitudes Toward Redistribution , ” found that as inequality increases , so does ideological conservatism in the electorate .
The erosion of the belief in health care as a government-protected right is perhaps the most dramatic reflection of these trends . In 2006 , by a margin of more than two to one , 69-28 , those surveyed by Gallup said that the federal government should guarantee health care coverage for all citizens of the United States . By late 2014 , however , Gallup found that this percentage had fallen 24 points to 45 percent , while the percentage of respondents who said health care is not a federal responsibility nearly doubled to 52 percent .
Robert Blendon , a professor of health policy and political analysis at Harvard ’ s School of Public Health , wrote in an email that the character of the debate over health care began to change during the 2008 campaign . Before that , according to Blendon , the major issue was the moral principle of providing care for the poor . In the context of the presidential campaign , however , the public focus shifted :
Critics started raising concerns about the cost of these plans — higher taxes and premiums for those with coverage , more government interference in physician choices , and of course the potential of abortion coverage . People with coverage [ 83.7 percent of the population in 2010 ] became concerned about the implications for middle income people with these universal plans .
The altered public mood is especially relevant because the Supreme Court is expected to issue a ruling later this year in King v. Burwell , a case that challenges the legality of the Affordable Care Act .