Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell said Thursday that the plagued Obamacare rollout has been “ absolute chaos ” and a sign of what ’ s to come from the controversial law , which he called an “ expensive joke . ”
Mr. McConnell , Kentucky Republican , said that once people are able to log in to the Obamacare website , HealthCare.gov , they are going to find out that they have fewer health care choices and higher insurance premiums than they could have had on the private market .
“ This can ’ t possibly ever work , ” he told WKYX-FM . “ The difficulty with the website is just the first experience people are having with it . It is just going to get worse down the road . ”
Mr. McConnell ’ s comments came as the lead contractor of the HealthCare.gov website was scheduled to testify Thursday before the Energy and Commerce Committee , which is looking for answers to why the rollout has been so rocky .
Republicans have pounced on the website problems as proof that the Affordable Care Act is doomed to fail .
House Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican , predicted Wednesday that by the end of the month , more Americans will have lost their insurance by being kicked off existing health plans than the number who were able to sign up in the website .
“ The government is not going to be able to do the business of selling health insurance better than the private sector could have , ” Mr. McConnell said Thursday . “ That was one of the many fallacies associated with Obamacare from the very beginning . ”
Asked about a new Fox News poll that showed six in 10 Americans feel the implementation of Obamacare has been a joke , Mr. McConnell quipped that the law is an “ expensive joke . ”
Mr. McConnell downplayed the notion that he is at odds with tea partyers who supported Sen. Ted Cruz ’ s push to reject any spending bills that included funding for Obamacare — a tactic that members of both parties blame for the 16-day government shutdown .
“ We all agree — that is , all Republicans — that Obamacare ought to be pulled out root and branch , but this is a tactic that can not and will not work , ” he said . “ And , of course , it did not work because Senate Democrats were not interested in doing that . ”
Mr. McConnell said he was not asking for Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius to resign over the technical glitches plaguing the Obamacare rollout because “ I don ’ t think , frankly , that this thing is fixable .
“ I ’ m not sure there is any genius they can bring in and clean it up , ” Mr. McConnell said , adding that the best way to scrap the law is at the ballot box . “ The way to get rid of Obamacare is to make me majority leader and elect a new president . ”