Sen. Dean Heller of Nevada said Friday he can not support the Senate health care bill as written , making him the fifth Republican to say he won ’ t vote for the Obamacare repeal plan unless it ’ s changed .
In a press conference , Mr. Heller said the draft plan released Thursday would pull the rug out from people who rely on Medicaid insurance for the poor .
More than 200,000 Nevadans were able to gain coverage after Republican Gov . Brian Sandoval accepted federal funding to expand the federal-state program under Obamacare .
“ I can not support a piece of legislation that takes insurance away from tens of millions of Americans and hundreds of thousands of Nevadans , ” Mr. Heller said .
He said he will not support a procedural motion to take up the bill Tuesday if it ’ s not rewritten .
Mr. Heller is considered the most vulnerable Republican in a 2018 election cycle that ’ s otherwise considered a safe one for the Senate GOP .
The senator said he is worried about phasing out President Obama ’ s Medicaid expansion and then capping federal funding for the underlying program , saying the one-two punch would erode Mr. Sandoval ’ s progress in caring for those seeking treatment for mental health problems and opioid addiction .
“ It ’ s going to be very difficult to get me to a ‘ yes , ’ Mr. Heller said .
His opposition to the draft plan is a new headache for Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , who is trying to cobble together 50 votes for the bill from his 52-seat majority under fast-track rules that allow Republicans to avoid a Democratic filibuster .
Already , GOP Sens . Rand Paul of Kentucky , Ted Cruz of Texas , Mike Lee of Utah and Ron Johnson of Wisconsin have said they can not support the bill without changes , saying it preserves too much of Obamacare or they won ’ t be able to vet the bill before a potential floor vote next week .
Senate Democrats say they won ’ t let down their guard , fearing GOP leaders will be able to flip the doubters by cutting side deals with the holdouts .
Their campaign arm predicted that Mr. Heller would backslide on his opposition .
“ Senator Heller is awfully good at taking marching orders from Washington , which is why he trotted out before the cameras to say he ’ s leaving the door open to supporting the Republican health care plan , ” the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee spokesman David Bernstein said .
Mr. Sandoval preceded Mr. Heller by laying out his case against Medicaid cuts , saying the scale-down in funding would be “ unsustainable ” for his state budget .
The Republican governor also said it is unrealistic to think people making $ 16,000 per year could afford coverage in the individual market by leveraging a tax credit under the Senate plan .
“ The current bill , as written , is something that needs to change , ” Mr. Sandoval said .