The important economic implications of Obamacare , President Obama ’ s costly national health care plan , are being debated in the court of public opinion . Yet the equally important political implications are only now beginning to rise to the surface .
While it ’ s true many Democrats ( and a few Republicans ) have long supported health care reform , it was rarely seen as a political strategy . The rhetoric usually revolved around lighter-sounding terms such as “ accessibility ” and “ affordability. ” Depending on state demographics and the political climate , these terms were wisely included in campaign literature and debates to show commitment to quality health care for all Americans . In reality , the status quo was maintained by both the elephant and the donkey .
Democrats were emboldened by the president ’ s health care plan , the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ( PPACA ) . When it was signed into law on March 23 , 2010 , the PPACA evolved into its current moniker , Obamacare , and the left ’ s political strategy dramatically shifted from rhetoric to action .
Sure , the political language still included “ accessibility ” and “ affordability. ” It also emphasized “ protection ” ( of Americans , as well as Medicare and Medicaid ) and “ fairness ” ( to reduce inequalities in the system ) . Various demographic groups , including seniors , minorities , liberals and women , were initially targeted . Over time , the underlying political message was sold on a wider basis to all Americans .
The Democratic position is nonsense . Obamacare will reportedly cost taxpayers $ 1 trillion , and will surely be a financial burden for future generations . It will increase government influence over virtually every aspect of health care . Choice for consumers will be dramatically reduced . The extensive phase-in period between 2014 and 2020 will serve as a constant source of confusion . Businesses will be crushed under the weight of this 2,700-page document . An estimated 80,000 jobs will be lost , according to the Congressional Budget Office . Moreover , regardless of political posturing , Medicare and Medicaid won ’ t be the same — and obviously can ’ t be the same due to the litany of new rules and regulations .
Republican opposition to Obamacare had some positive political effect . A Reuters-Ipsos poll in June 2012 showed 56 percent of Americans surveyed were against it . To be sure , there was an unsurprising political divide : 86 percent of Republicans opposed it , whereas only 25 percent of Democrats felt the same . That said , the general consensus was Obamacare wouldn ’ t fix health care in an adequate fashion , and that real reform was necessary .
Unfortunately , that ’ s not going to happen . Mr. Obama was elected to a second term , and Obamacare will become a reality . Meanwhile , there ’ s a new chapter being written in the politics of Obamacare that could end up having worse implications for Americans — and interestingly , for the GOP ’ s future .
Politico ’ s Jonathan Allen recently noted some 19 Republican governors in ( mostly ) red states have come up with a different strategy . Louisiana ’ s Bobby Jindal , Texas ’ Rick Perry , Ohio ’ s John Kasich and Wisconsin ’ s Scott Walker , among others , “ have decided it ’ s better to have Obamacare forced on them than to legitimize it by setting up their own exchanges , even if that means empowering the federal government at the expense of the states. ” Maine Gov . Paul LePage ’ s comments to Bloomberg , reprinted by Mr. Allen , were eye-opening : “ I ’ m not lifting a finger . We ’ re not going to get involved . We ’ re going to let Mr. Obama do a federal exchange . It ’ s his bill . ”
Thus , various Republican leaders will use the political tactic of blaming the White House for forcing this issue . They will maintain their hands are tied with respect to Obamacare . They will also appeal to voters to keep them in office to watch over this health care monster they ’ re refusing to slay .
What ’ s next ? GOP leaders from red states on the verge of becoming blue states holding their tongues to protect their careers ? Moderate Republicans using this non-exchange exchange to distinguish themselves from more vocal conservative Republicans and Tea Party supporters ?
This is a terrible move . As someone who lives in a country with a universal health care system that has badly declined in recent decades , I can say with authority that maintaining radio silence about Obamacare is going to backfire . The economic cost of implementing it will be huge , but the economic and political costs of sitting back and doing nothing could be immense . This won ’ t help the Republican Party , the country or the American people .
Hence , red- and blue-state Republicans must continue to oppose it vigorously and point out the costs to taxpayers and long-lasting economic damage at every turn . Once Obamacare is in place , it will be incredibly difficult to ever remove it . At that point , the GOP ’ s political battle to protect health care will be effectively over .
Michael Taube is a former speechwriter for Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper and a columnist with The ███ .