The Trump administration announced Saturday evening that it is temporarily freezing billions of dollars of payments to health insurance companies intended to help them manage higher-risk patients , sparking backlash from the industry ’ s lobbying arm as insurers continue to struggle to adjust to the administration ’ s repeated attacks on Obamacare .
The federal government provides Obamacare insurers risk adjustment payments , which are supposed to cushion insurers from taking steep loses on high risk patients in the Obamacare marketplace . The government paid out over $ 10 billion in these in 2017 .
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service announced the abrupt halt of these payments Saturday evening , citing a February 2018 ruling from the U.S. District Court for the District of New Mexico that invalidates them .
“ We were disappointed by the court ’ s recent ruling , ” CMS Administrator Seema Verma said in a statement . “ As a result of this litigation , billions of dollars in risk adjustment payments and collections are now on hold . CMS has asked the court to reconsider its ruling , and hopes for a prompt resolution that allows CMS to prevent more adverse impacts on Americans who receive their insurance in the individual and small group markets . ”
The insurance industry is already speaking out against the administration ’ s decision , calling it a crucial blow during a time when insurance companies are trying to come up with premiums and packages for 2019 . ( RELATED : Obama Gave Trump Some Laughable Advice About Obamacare )
“ We are very discouraged by the new market disruption brought about by the decision to freeze risk adjustment payments . This decision comes at a critical time when insurance providers are developing premiums for 2019 and states are reviewing rates , ” trade group America ’ s Health Insurance Plans ( AHIP ) said in a statement Saturday . “ We encourage the Administration to reevaluate its decision and work with all stakeholders to make health care more affordable for all Americans .. ”
Insurers themselves are voicing concerns for market destabilization following the announcement .
“ This action will significantly increase 2019 premiums for millions of individuals and small business owners and could result in far fewer health plan choices , ” Blue Cross Blue Shield Association President and CEO Scott Serota said in a statement . “ It will undermine Americans ’ access to affordable coverage , particularly those who need medical care the most . ”
Over the course of his first 18 months in office , the president has slowly targeted Obamacare with a series of moves intended to undermine the system and disrupt the marketplace . ( RELATED : Trump ’ s Next Move To Knife Obamacare )
The president has rolled back funding for a program intended to help individuals navigate the insurance marketplace , Obamacare ’ s navigator program , signed an executive order to allow for groups to purchase insurance across state lines , stopped federal funding for Obamacare subsidies , pushed for consumer access to more affordable short-term , limited duration health insurance plans , cut Obamacare ’ s open enrollment period in half and its advertising budget 90 percent .
Trump made repealing and replacing Obamacare a key part of his successful bid for the presidency in 2016 , but he has , thus far , been unable to materialize that goal .
House Republicans passed a bill — the American Health Care Act — in May 2017 after a few months of rocky negotiations that nearly stopped the effort in its track .
Senate Republicans had a more difficult time , given their 52- and subsequently slim 51-seat majority in the upper chamber . The Senate tried roughly a handful of times in 2017 to repeal and replace Obamacare , offering up a “ skinny repeal ” in July 2017 with no replacement as a last-ditch effort to overhaul the American health care system . That , too , failed to pass muster within the entirety of either the Republican or Democratic conferences .
Ultimately , Republicans and the White House have moved on from repealing and replacing Obamacare , although a coalition of outside conservative groups have hopes of reviving the debate in the Senate .
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has made it clear he is ready to move on from the issue , but he has said he would entertain a proposal that was guaranteed to get enough votes to pass .