With the second Obamacare enrollment period in the books , congressional Democrats are already calling on the administration to give those who missed Sunday ’ s deadline more time . They say it ’ s unfair to expect health care consumers to have followed the law ’ s coverage mandate because their first round of Obamacare taxes aren ’ t due until April .
Democrats said Americans filling out their taxes will get their first big reminder about needing health care coverage if they have to pay a penalty for last year , which could goose them into signing up for this year — except the deadline for penalty-free enrollment in the federal exchange for 2015 expired Sunday . Those who aren ’ t covered this year will face an even bigger tax wallop next year .
“ Without a special enrollment period , many people making a shared responsibility payment won ’ t have another opportunity to get health coverage this year , ” Reps. Sander M. Levin of Michigan and Jim McDermott of Washington , the top Democrats on the House Ways and Means Committee , said in a statement .
The tax penalty is the big stick behind Obamacare , pushing folks to abide by the law ’ s “ individual mandate ” that all Americans either have insurance , qualify for an exemption or pay the tax .
The penalty for lacking insurance last year is the greater of $ 95 or 1 percent of household income above the filing threshold , to be paid as part of 2014 income taxes , which must be filed by April 15 .
The administration predicted this year that as many as 6 million Americans will pay a penalty on their 2014 taxes .
The tax penalty is slated to leap this year to $ 325 , or 2 percent of income .
The Health and Human Services Department estimated that 10 million new and returning customers had signed up on the exchanges through Feb. 11 . While it is unclear how many more entered during the deadline rush , or how many will effectuate coverage by paying their premiums , the agency is poised to surpass its modest goal of 9.1 million enrollees for 2015 — a target below congressional budget estimates of 12 million .
Washington state officials Monday announced their own deadline extension , giving residents until April 17 to sign up on their state exchanges . That puts pressure on the Obama administration to offer a similar grace period to customers in the 37 states that rely on the federal HealthCare.gov exchange .
The administration has given a little ground by allowing those who experienced last-minute glitches in signing up until Feb. 22 to finish their applications . They can still be covered as of March 1 .
But officials have hinted for weeks that they could do more . On Friday , Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell told Politico that the department will make a final decision within two weeks .
The administration offered similar relief to customers who were “ in line ” when last year ’ s deadlines hit , though Republicans said Mr. Obama was overstepping the bounds of his authority in unilaterally moving deadlines .
Administration officials at the time defended the move as a type of prosecutorial discretion , similar to Mr. Obama ’ s immigration actions .
Timothy Jost , a law professor at Washington and Lee University who closely tracks the 2010 Affordable Care Act , said Obamacare allows the administration to offer special enrollment periods akin to those under the Medicare prescription drug benefit law , which provided for “ exceptional circumstances . ”
“ I think that this would just be another example of that , ” he said of the proposed fix for penalty payers . “ I think the discretion is pretty wide open to do that . ”
He said those who face the individual mandate penalty are likely to be healthier than most others — they ’ ve shirked coverage so far — so their late entry would not skew insurance rates .
“ I think , if anything , it would improve the market , ” he said .
HealthPocket , a Web company that lets customers compare insurance plans , said interest in open enrollment tends to be front-loaded and then wane significantly in the second half . Going forward , it said , the government should offer a shorter enrollment period that coincides with tax season .
“ These changes would not only benefit consumers but also reduce advertising expenditures by exchanges and insurance companies alike , ” HealthPocket Inc. CEO Bruce Telkamp said .