( CNN ) - Rep. Todd Young took his turn delivering the GOP ’ s weekly address on Saturday to assail Obamacare ’ s negative impacts on his constituents .
“ This is what betrayal looks like , ” the Indiana Republican said in the address , speaking of battles some of his constituents have fought with the health care law , losing coverage and gaining increased costs on their insurance premiums .
“ In recent weeks , I ’ ve heard heartbreaking stories from many Hoosiers about the impact the new health care law is having on them and their families , ” Young said .
Key to Young ’ s argument was a promise President Barack Obama made on the stump for his signature legislation : that Americans who liked their insurance and their doctor would be able to keep both under the Affordable Care Act , better known as Obamacare .
Some plans have been cancelled because they do not meet the minimum standards of coverage mandated by the law .
“ Here you have hardworking people who were repeatedly told not to worry , that their coverage would stay the same and-if anything-their costs would go down . Just the opposite is happening , ” Young said .
“ Adding insult to injury , the White House – the President – isn ’ t leveling with us . He ’ s trying to cover his tracks , claiming he never really made these promises . ”
The disastrous rollout of the HealthCare.gov online exchanges has provided Republicans ample ammunition to attack Obama , his law and his leadership .
Health Secretary Kathleen Sebelius has endured withering fire from congressional Republicans during hearings on the website .
Young took his own shot at the website Saturday , speaking of constituents who spent days and weeks trying to log on .
In reaction to the delays , “ I ’ ve authored a bill to delay this law ’ s individual mandate tax , ” Young said .
“ After all , how can you tax people for not buying a product from a website that doesn ’ t work ? ”
Young also touted the legislation House Republicans plan on introducing next week that would guarantee Americans could keep their insurance plans under Obamacare .
“ No one should have to go to their inbox or mailbox in fear of finding out they ’ re losing a plan they like – or worse , a plan they need , ” he said .
One of the few things Young did not say Saturday , however , was “ repeal. ” Nor “ replace , ” some of the GOP ’ s favorite rallying cries against a law the party base has despised since it was passed by Democrats on a party-line vote in 2010 .
That ’ s not to say Young was in anyway taking it easy on Obamacare .
“ We ’ re going to keep asking hard questions and having hearings so we can get to the bottom of this , ” Young said .
“ The problem isn ’ t just a website – it ’ s the whole law . Let ’ s stop this train wreck now . ”