President Trump on Friday unveiled his administration ’ s plan for lowering prescription drug prices , vowing to “ take on ” the powerful pharmaceutical industry while calling for an end to “ global freeloading ” that has allowed foreign countries to pay less for American medicine .
“ America will not be cheated any longer , and especially will not be cheated by foreign countries , ” Trump said Friday in a Rose Garden address .
Trump said Americans , through higher drug prices at home , are essentially subsidizing the “ enormous cost of research and development ” for the benefit of other countries getting those drugs for cheap .
“ In some cases , medicine that costs a few dollars in a foreign country costs hundreds of dollars in America for the same pill , with the same ingredients , in the same package , made in the same plant , ” Trump said . “ That is unacceptable . ”
Said Trump , “ It 's unfair . It 's ridiculous . It 's not going to happen any longer . It 's time to end the global freeloading once and for all . ”
Trump said he 's directing his top trade official to correct this `` injustice '' with U.S. trading partners .
Trump 's “ American Patients First ” blueprint includes several other tactics for lowering notoriously high drug prices in the U.S .
The plan calls for increasing competition , creating incentives for drugmakers to lower initial prices and slashing federal rules that make it harder for private insurers to negotiate lower prices .
“ Today my administration is launching the most sweeping action in history to lower the price of prescription drugs for the American people , ” Trump said .
The president also had tough words for America ’ s pharmaceutical industry , saying he plans to “ take on one of the biggest obstacles to affordable medicine , the tangled web of special interests . ”
“ The drug lobby is making an absolute fortune at the expense of American consumers , ” he said . “ No industry spends more money on lobbying than the pharmaceutical health products industry . ”
Top officials at the Department of Health and Human Services also focused on the imbalance between drug prices at home and overseas , writing in a ███ op-ed that “ foreign countries and their government-run health-care systems bully our drug manufacturers into unrealistically low prices , allowing other countries to freeload off of American innovation . ”
“ Americans should be able to reap the rewards of living in the country that has brought the world more new drugs than any other , ” wrote HHS Secretary Alex Azar , Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Scott Gottlieb and Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Administrator Seema Verma .
HHS SECRETARY , FDA COMMISSIONER , CMS ADMINISTRATOR : HELP IS ON THE WAY FOR AMERICANS FACING HIGH DRUG PRICES
Trump ’ s plan , though , will not include giving the federal Medicare program power to directly negotiate prices with drugmakers . Trump campaigned on the idea , which is vigorously opposed by the pharmaceutical industry .
“ Instead of putting forth a bold initiative , the president pulled his punch , ” House minority leader Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , said in a statement . “ The president is breaking his promise to the American people to allow Medicare to negotiate lower drug prices , which would save seniors billions of dollars at the pharmacy . ”
Public outrage over drug costs has been growing for years , because Americans are being squeezed in a number of ways : New medicines for cancer and other life-threatening diseases often launch with prices exceeding $ 100,000 per year . Drugs for common ailments like diabetes and asthma routinely see price hikes around 10 percent annually . Meanwhile some companies have been buying up once-cheap older drugs and hiking prices by 1,000 percent or more .