First lady Melania Trump emphasized protecting the “ most vulnerable ” on Monday , issuing a statement in support of new Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) information on accessing state help for treating babies born to opioid-addicted mothers .
“ Today , the Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) released information on how states can cover the cost of treating babies suffering from neonatal abstinence syndrome ( NAS ) , ” the first lady said in a statement released Monday . She explained , “ NAS occurs when babies are exposed to opioids or other addictive drugs during pregnancy , and then experience painful withdrawal symptoms during their first few weeks of life . ”
The statement linked to new HHS Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ( CMS ) guidance on leveraging a Medicare program in efforts to fight the opioid epidemic . CMS estimates that as of 2012 , every 25 minutes an infant in America was born with NAS . Approximately 80 percent received treatment through Medicaid . Acting Director for the Center for Medicaid and CHIP Services Tim Hill said the number of children being born with NAS is growing rapidly .
“ It is our responsibility to do all we can to ensure our most vulnerable are protected , ” said the first lady , who recalled her trip last year to Lily ’ s Place . She previously mentioned visiting Lily ’ s Place as she unveiled her official “ Be Best ” policy platform last month . The West Virginia non-profit offers “ addiction recovery treatment ” for all members of families .
“ ‘ Be Best ’ is dedicated to bringing attention to successful programs like Lily ’ s Place because our nation needs more programs like these to help struggling Americans , ” said Mrs. Trump , who added that she is “ proud to support HHS in its continued efforts to combat the opioid epidemic . ”
She nudged states , hospital groups , and nonprofits to visit the HHS CMS resource page online for information on “ benefits and waivers available to help these babies and their parents . ”