Rob and Katherine Deane thought they were being responsible by buying insurance policies to provide for care in their later years . Instead , the Michigan couple are encountering a growing gap in health-care coverage that the government overhaul will do nothing to fix .
The Deanes say they got hit last year with rate increases on both of their long-term-care policies , insurance plans that pay for nursing homes or in-home care . Manulife Financial Corp. 's John Hancock unit told Mrs. Deane that the premium on her 10-year-old policy would jump 77 % to $ 6,406 a year . Her husband 's insurer , Unum Group , increased his premium by 25 % .
After they complained , Hancock trimmed Mrs. Deane 's rate hike to 46 % . In exchange , she agreed to shrink the policy 's benefit period to six years from 10 . `` Seniors are really getting hammered , '' says Dr. Deane , a 76-year-old retired surgeon .
Spokespeople for Hancock and Unum declined to discuss the Deanes ' specific situation . In general , the insurers say , they give policyholders ways to reduce or eliminate a looming rate increase , generally by giving up part of their benefits .
The long-term-insurance industry now is shrinking , premiums are soaring and there is no fix in sight . At the same time , government safety-net programs , already under cost-cutting pressure , are bracing for demand from more of the 77 million aging baby boomers .
Related Article What You Need to Know About Long-Term-Care Insurance
President Barack Obama 's health-care overhaul is supposed to provide insurance for millions of Americans . But the administration abandoned an effort to provide affordable long-term care , concluding it was too expensive . Instead , Congress appointed a commission to find ideas that could become law in five years .
Currently , Medicare pays for only short stays in nursing homes or in-home care under limited conditions . For the most part , seniors who need care have to burn through their savings to pay for it . Only after they are impoverished will Medicaid—the government health program for poor people—pay for a basic level of care .
Insurers have been aware of this gap for decades , and many began selling long-term-care policies in the 1980s and 1990s . They vowed to provide policyholders with better access to high-quality nursing homes and home-based health care than Medicaid .
But insurers underestimated how fast medical costs would rise , and how many seniors would actually use the benefits . And they underpriced the insurance premiums . Making matters worse , some insurers that were `` hungry for market share '' charged too little at first and planned to increase premiums later , says Joseph M. Belth , editor of the Insurance Forum newsletter and professor emeritus of insurance at Indiana University .
Many once-prominent sellers of long-term-care insurance are in full retreat . Five of the 10 largest sellers , including MetLife Inc. , Prudential Financial Inc. and Unum , have sharply reduced or discontinued sales since 2010 , according to Moody 's Investors Service .
Only a dozen or so companies still sell meaningful numbers of policies , down from about 100 a decade ago , according to LifePlans Inc. , a consultant . In the past decade , sales to individuals have fallen by two-thirds to 233,000 policies a year , and the number of insured people is stuck at about seven million .
Most of the actuarial assumptions made by insurers years ago turned out to be overly optimistic . Underestimating how long elderly policyholders would live—and collect benefits as a result—led to a 14 % shortfall in premiums , according to a presentation to college students by PricewaterhouseCoopers principal Larry Rubin .
And many state regulators erred by routinely signing off on the premium on the new products and subsequent rate increases without questioning the companies ' pricing assumptions , some officials say .
Since then , many states have adopted `` rate stabilization '' laws to tighten oversight . Michigan , where the Deanes live , adopted such changes in 2006 `` to reduce the potential of future rate increases by requiring a more accurate initial pricing of policies by insurers , '' says an insurance department spokesman .
The insurance industry also failed to realize how desperate many Americans are to protect themselves from runaway nursing-home costs . So they cling to their long-term-care coverage for dear life .
Many insurers predicted that 5 % to 7 % of people who bought long-term-care coverage would cancel their policies each year without tapping their benefits .
Instead , the annual cancellation rate at many insurers has been less than 2 % , actuaries say . Initial premiums would have been about 35 % higher if insurers had assumed such a low cancellation rate , PricewaterhouseCoopers estimates .
`` We do n't want to be a burden to our children , '' says Allan Sugarman , 71 , of Morganville , N.J. Mr. Sugarman and his wife , Joyce , bought long-term-care policies from John Hancock about a decade ago after hearing that a friend had paid more than $ 100,000 to support his father in an assisted-living facility . They later learned another friend 's disabled mother was sleeping on her son 's sofa , for lack of an affordable alternative .
The couple are paying $ 6,380 a year for the two policies . They want to keep their coverage so much that Ms. Sugarman says she was relieved when Hancock let them avoid a double-digit rate increase by sacrificing part of an inflation-protection perk .
Some regulators are making it tough for insurers to bump up premiums to a sustainable level , contributing to the decision by some companies to leave the market . Last year , a Pennsylvania state-court judge faulted the state 's insurance department for not approving big premium increases for two troubled insurers .
`` This case presents a serious indictment of the existing system of rate regulation of long-term-care insurance , '' Judge Mary Hannah Leavitt wrote . Pennsylvania officials have appealed the ruling and are seeking approval of a rehabilitation plan for the shaky insurers . The department declined to comment on the judge 's comments .
Genworth Financial Inc. , with about a 33 % market share of long-term-care policies sold to individuals , said in May that it is seeking premium increases averaging more than 50 % to stave off more losses in its oldest policies .
Genworth also halted sales June 1 through AARP , the older-Americans ' group with a huge pool of potential customers .
`` We 've learned a lot over the last 30 years , and we now believe we have a better ability and more knowledge '' to issue policies that `` provide significant '' protection to consumers and the insurer , Genworth Chief Executive Thomas McInerney said in an interview .
The insurer started requiring blood tests and other medical screening , which the industry generally had n't done before . And it is charging women who apply individually more than men for the first time because women tend to live longer and require more years of care .
In general , a 55-year-old single person buying long-term-care protection can expect to pay $ 2,065 a year for $ 162,000 in benefits , including a 3 % inflation-protection rider—a 20 % increase from last year , according to the American Association for Long-Term Care Insurance trade group .
Rate increases are forcing existing policyholders to dig into savings , sacrifice elsewhere—or drop their coverage . For insurers , that could mean healthier policyholders abandon ship while sicker , more expensive customers hang on .
Bob Barry , a 74-year-old AT & T Inc. retiree in Bluffton , S.C. , says he walked away from his Hancock policy 18 months ago after the annual bill for basic , three-year coverage jumped about 50 % to nearly $ 1,000 . He and his wife , both healthy , are grappling with big premium increases for their homeowner 's insurance , too , he says .
For the time being , they chose to maintain coverage for his wife , who is four years younger , reasoning that she could outlive him . `` I wanted her to keep hers because I expect to check out before her , '' he quips .
Many insurance agents and financial planners are steering clients to new `` hybrid '' coverage , basically life insurance with a rider providing long-term-care benefits . One appeal : The policyholder can leave something to heirs even if the long-term-care benefits do n't get tapped .
But the long-term-care benefits often are less generous than those in conventional policies , and policyholders typically have to write one big check upfront to obtain the coverage , rather than paying premiums each year , says Nancy Courser , the Deanes ' insurance agent .
`` We have no way of knowing if these policies will self-destruct in the future , '' cautions Mary Ahearn , a financial planner in Arizona .
Genworth CEO Thomas McInerney said in an interview that the insurer now has a better ability to issue long-term-care policies that `` provide significant consumer financial protection '' while also benefiting the company . An earlier version of this article incorrectly quoted Mr. McInerney as saying that the company believes it now has a better ability to issue policies that `` provide significant financial protection to Genworth . ''