It 's hard to find an issue on which President Obama and GOP challenger Mitt Romney disagree more than health care .
The 2010 Affordable Care Act is considered President Obama 's signature legislative achievement , as well as something Romney has vowed to repeal .
Yet while Democrats in tough races in 2010 shied away from touting the just-passed health law , known by its detractors as Obamacare , the president has embraced both the name and the law on the campaign trail this year .
`` We passed health reform — yes , I like the name 'Obamacare ' — so your insurance companies ca n't jerk you around anymore , '' he told a cheering crowd in Manchester , N.H. , last week . `` So young people can stay on their parents ' plans till they 're 26 . So women ca n't be charged more than men for their insurance — being a woman is not a pre-existing condition . ''
But the health law has been one thing on which Romney has been consistent .
`` What the court did not do on its last day in session , I will do on my first day if elected president of the U.S. , '' he said just after the Supreme Court 's decision in June that found the law largely constitutional . `` And that is I will act to repeal Obamacare . ''
Now Romney ca n't actually repeal the law on his first day in office . He 'll need Congress to do that . It might take a while , but it 's likely he can slow or stall implementation .
Still , the big question is what , if anything , he 'd try to replace the law with .
Here 's how he answered that question at the first presidential debate in Denver :
`` It 's a lengthy description , but No . 1 , pre-existing conditions are covered under my plan . No . 2 , young people are able to stay on their family plan . That 's already offered in the private marketplace ; you do n't have — have the government mandate that for that to occur . ''
In fact , Romney 's staff had to step in after the debate to clarify that , no , pre-existing conditions would n't be covered for most people . Only those who have maintained continuous coverage .
There also would n't be any guarantee for young adults to stay on their parents ' plans ; Romney says it would happen because the private sector is already doing it , albeit with a push from the law .
`` The right answer is not to have the federal government take over health care and start mandating to the providers across America , telling a patient and a doctor what kind of treatment they can have , '' Romney said at the Denver debate . `` That 's the wrong way to go . The private market and individual responsibility always work best . ''
Now this sounds curious to people like Jonathan Gruber , an economist from MIT who worked on both the Massachusetts plan that passed when Romney was governor in 2006 and the federal law passed two years ago . Gruber says he is stunned at how Romney can still profess support for his state 's law but opposition to the federal law , since the two are such close cousins .
`` This is an unprecedented case of a major national policy where we ran an experiment first , '' he said .
`` We wanted to cover the uninsured and we 've covered two-thirds of our uninsured residents , '' Gruber said . `` Our uninsurance rate is now down to 3 percent , compared to an 18 percent national rate . And we wanted to fix what was a broken non-group insurance market . And we did ; we lowered premiums in that market by 50 percent . ''
What the original Massachusetts law did not do , however , is attempt to lower health costs overall . ( A second law , passed this year , does attempt to take on that task . )
It is cost control that makes the federal law so controversial . There are two big barriers to getting a handle on health spending , Gruber says . `` The first is the science , which is we do n't really know how to do it , '' he says . `` The second is the politics , which is that even if we did , the politicians would n't let us . ''
That said , however , the Affordable Care Act does start to take some steps in the direction of cost control . The problem is that most of them are still largely invisible to the public .
`` It 's all technical ; it 's all professional ; it 's all behind the scenes , '' says Len Nichols of George Mason University .
Nichols says that includes things like paying hospitals less if patients who are discharged are readmitted to the hospital too soon , or encouraging doctors and hospitals to better coordinate patient care .
`` But it is indeed making health care cheaper , '' he says . `` Why are health care premiums growing less than they were ? Part of the reason is because people have figured out , 'Hey , we can do this stuff cheaper . And we 're going to have to , to survive in the long run . So let 's start now . ' ``
The question is , does the health care industry need a federal law to make these changes continue ? Many say no .
`` All the innovations that Obamacare is trying to impose in a top-down sort of way already exist in the marketplace , '' says Michael Cannon of the libertarian Cato Institute .
Cannon , like Romney , says real cost control can come only from the private sector .
`` Giving patients the money is going to encourage them to be more cost-conscious consumers and force prices down in a way that government has proven itself unable to do . ''
The problem is , no one knows which would work better because neither has really been tried . So the choice is to let the new law continue to play out , or repeal it and see whether Congress can pass something else . That is , if it does n't take Congress another generation to reach another compromise .