Nancy Pelosi told us there would be days like this . The only way to find out what was in Obamacare was to pass it and see what happens . Congress passed it , the messiah signed it , and we ’ re beginning to see what happens .
Barack Obama and the gang that can ’ t shoot straight aren ’ t having much fun , but if they think they aren ’ t having fun now , just wait . The “ best ” is yet to come .
The best the Democrats can say about Obamacare is that it ’ s an approaching train wreck , in the memorable description of Sen. Max Baucus of Montana . Mr. Baucus was one of the authors of the legislation and now he ’ s hurrying home to Montana for good , anxious to avert his eyes from all the hair , teeth and eyeballs soon to be scattered along the railroad right-of-way .
Pundits and professors are rifling through the thesaurus , looking for the right word to describe what the Wall Street Journal calls “ a fiasco for the ages. ” The Journal editorialists reminded everyone that they “ fought the Affordable Care Act from start to passage , and we ’ d like to apologize to our readers . It turns out we weren ’ t nearly critical enough . ”
The editors of The New York Times , Mr. Obama ’ s most reliable sycophants , are deep in mourning , but working furiously to apply more rouge to the corpse before it turns the parlor too fragrant for a wake . It ’ s summer , and they ’ re running out of ice .
SEE ALSO : Tweaks , twists and turns of Obama ’ s health law ; mandate delay just the latest
The “ downside ” to the delay in implementing the employer mandate is that it gives Republican critics the facts and figures , the “ ammunition to portray the health care reforms as a failure , ” The Times says . But not to worry , the year ’ s delay decreed by the president will allow the Internal Revenue Service time to figure out “ how this mandate will work … it is more important to do this right than to do it quickly . ”
It ’ s ever so reassuring to know the IRS is on the case .
Mr. Obama and his gang obviously don ’ t know what to do next . Handwringing and delay is never a strategy for D-Day ; when the beach slides under the bottom of the Higgins boats it ’ s too late to consider whether the invasion was a good idea .
The White House announced the one-year delay in enforcing the employer insurance mandate for Obamacare , which might not even be legal , just as everyone was hurrying out of Dodge for the Fourth of July holiday . Minions were hastily assigned to explain the delay .
Mark Mazur , the deputy assistant ( or is it the assistant deputy ? ) of the Treasury assigned to dream up new taxes , complained that the delay was caused by the “ complexity of the requirements. ” Life , in addition to being unfair , turns out to be complicated , too .
Valerie Jarrett , the president ’ s most trusted ( if not necessarily most competent ) adviser , promised that the determined president is “ staying the course. ” This is not reassuring , either , since it ’ s “ the course ” that ’ s the source of the disaster . The flood has washed out the bridge across the river , but never mind , the road to where the bridge used to be is still there .
Obamacare probably can ’ t be fixed short of dumping it and starting over , but this would require an admission by the president and his men ( and women ) that they ’ re as incompetent and maladroit as events reveal them to be . The president ’ s acolytes in the media hail the delay as a genius stroke of politics , something to get the Democrats past the 2014 congressional elections before “ the fiasco for the ages ” is displayed in full .
The president knows better . If this is a genius stroke of politics , he would have called the correspondents into the Rose Garden and , flanked by Cabinet ministers , announced the delay to cheers and applause .
Over the weeks and months leading to November 2014 , as The Times observes , the Republicans will have ample opportunity to apply their ammunition to a very fat and attractive target . Even now , the lawyers are searching for clients and precedents to attack the legality of Mr. Obama ’ s delay .
The language of the Affordable Care Act sets out in Section 1513 in “ black-letter law ” that its provisions “ shall apply to months beginning after December 31 , 2013. ” The language is plain and clear ; only a lawyer or judge could misunderstand it .
Plain and clear though the language is , Obamacare was carelessly written and pounded through Congress with such speed and abandon that no one had time ( or inclination ) to see what was in it . Now we know , and the best is yet to come .
• Wesley Pruden is editor emeritus of The ███ .