Key parts of the Republican health care bill , including defunding Planned Parenthood and barring the use of tax credits for abortion coverage , are not eligible for the fast-track process Republicans are using to prevent a Democratic filibuster , says the Senate ’ s referee , throwing yet another roadblock in front of President Trump ’ s attempt to repeal and replace Obamacare this week .
Already , Republican leaders are struggling to gather enough support from the party ’ s rank and file for their replacement bill or a straightforward repeal of the 2010 law , even though they are leveraging “ budget reconciliation ” rules to carve Democrats out of the process .
In new guidance , the Senate parliamentarian made their task tougher by saying key parts of the plan should require 60 votes to pass , according to Senate Democrats on the Budget Committee .
“ The parliamentarian ’ s decision today proves once again that the process Republicans have undertaken to repeal the Affordable Care Act and throw 22 million Americans off of health insurance is a disaster , ” Sen. Bernard Sanders , Vermont independent , said after detailing Parliamentarian Elizabeth MacDonough ’ s findings on Friday .
Conservatives and advocates have insisted on pro-life language in whatever plan emerges , yet Democrats will not help them get the votes they would need to strip Planned Parenthood of Medicaid funding for a year or endorse certain policy changes , such as a continuous coverage provision to replace Obamacare ’ s “ individual mandate . ”
Some conservatives argue that Vice President Mike Pence , as president of the Senate , can overrule the parliamentarian while presiding over the chamber , though many Republicans are leery of making such a bold move .
The office of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , Kentucky Republican , said the parliamentarian ’ s guidance is not a ruling and there is time to tweak the language , though the roadblock further clouds plans to vote Tuesday to take up a House-passed bill , work through amendments and reach for final passage .
A push to debate the latest version of Mr. McConnell ’ s replacement bill ran into opposition from four senators last week , and then three moderate Republicans balked at reviving a 2015 bill that would gut Obamacare but delay its full effect for two years , buying Congress time to come up with an overhaul .
It ’ s unclear whether enough senators will take leadership ’ s advice and vote to act on the bill this week or risk pushing members of the Republican base to link arms with Democrats to block debate .
With Sen. John McCain of Arizona absent because of his sudden cancer diagnosis , Republican leaders can not afford more than one defection and still proceed with the bill or pass a plan .
“ We are going to vote this week , and I think until the vote is actually on the floor of the Senate , some people may not tell you what they ’ re actually going to do , ” Sen. John Barrasso , Wyoming Republican , told CBS ’ “ Face the Nation . “ We all got elected to legislate , and that ’ s why we ’ re here . ”
The White House is imploring senators to start debate so they can throw Obamacare into the dustbin , saying they are just a few votes shy of fulfilling their seven-year promise .
“ ObamaCare is dead and the Democrats are obstructionists , no ideas or votes , only obstruction . It is solely up to the 52 Republican Senators ! ” Mr. Trump said on Twitter .
Some moderate Republicans are calling for a do-over , saying it ’ s best to rope in Democrats as they struggle to pass the replacement bill , which leaders wrote behind closed doors .
Sen. Susan M. Collins , Maine Republican , said senators don ’ t even know which path will take precedent if they take up the bill to repeal Obamacare and begin a marathon round of amendments .
“ We don ’ t know whether we ’ re going to be voting on the House bill , the first version of the Senate bill , the second version of the Senate bill , a new version of the Senate bill or a 2015 bill that would have repealed the Affordable Care Act now and then said that somehow we ’ ll figure out a replacement over the next two years , ” she told CBS . “ I don ’ t think that ’ s a good approach to facing legislation that affects millions of people and one-sixth of our economy . ”
From the sidelines , senior Democrats warned Republican leaders not to try to buy off wavering moderates after the parliamentarian raised the vote threshold for the “ Buffalo bailout ” — a part of the House bill that limited New York state ’ s ability to force counties to contribute to the Medicaid program . The measure pulled in votes from moderate House Republicans in upstate New York .
“ This will greatly tie the majority leader ’ s hands as he tries to win over reluctant Republicans with state-specific provisions . We will challenge every one of them , ” said Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer , New York Democrat .
The biggest political victims of the scrubbing process , or “ Byrd bath , ” were defunding Planned Parenthood and the prohibition on using tax credits to buy plans that cover abortion . Stripping out the pro-life language would be a major sticking point and could imperil passage , particularly when the House revisits the plan .
Ms. MacDonough also flagged a provision that would lock consumers out of the market for six months if they experience a significant lapse in coverage and want to buy health insurance again , Mr. Sanders said .
Republicans included the provision to replace Obamacare ’ s individual mandate , which requires Americans to have coverage or pay a tax and serves as the main prod to get healthy people into the marketplace .
Ms. MacDonough said other aspects of the Republican plan , including work requirements for Medicaid recipients and the repeal of “ cost sharing ” reimbursements in 2020 , could pass on a majority-line vote .
Other provisions in the Republican plan , such as one that would allow states to waive certain Obamacare regulations for insurers , remain under review .
The parliamentarian did not vet a plan by Sen. Ted Cruz , Texas Republican , that would let insurers offer plans that do not comply with Obamacare ’ s coverage requirements as long as they also sell plans that do , presumably because the Congressional Budget Office has not yet scored the plan .
Mr. Cruz and Sen. Mike Lee , Utah Republican , argue that including a version of the “ freedom ” amendment would drive down premiums for healthier consumers , though analysts say the idea would segment the marketplace , driving up costs for sicker consumers .