As ObamaCare enrollment begins , technical glitches on federal and numerous state-run insurance exchanges are delaying and turning away Americans . The following is a round-up of reported problems .
Tennessee : Reporter seeking ObamaCare coverage ends up at vacant building
Can a government that can not figure out how to keep itself open figure out how to manage America ’ s health care system ?
The launch of the ObamaCare exchanges is still off to a rocky start . Error messages continued to pop up on the main healthcare.gov site on Tuesday . And one Tennessee reporter has detailed her daylong , and ultimately unsuccessful , saga in trying to sign up for health care via the new insurance exchanges – a goose chase that sent her , in the end , to a vacant building .
The travails of Tennessean reporter Shelley DuBois started at 9:33 a.m. on Tuesday when she tried to log on to the state website , which is really the federal government exchange .
“ We have a lot of visitors on our site right now and we ’ re working to make your experience here better , ” a site message read . “ Please wait here until we send you to the login page . Thanks for your patience ! ”
DuBois reports she got to the login page about 10 minutes later , only to be stopped at the page asking for answers to security questions .
“ Time to hit the phones , ” writes DuBois , who at about 9:48 a.m. said a “ nice lady ” at the Nashville Academy of Medicine , to which the website referred her , said she wasn ’ t trained to take the call .
DuBois was referred to Health Assist , only to learn shortly after 10 a.m. that the group didn ’ t have any pricing information .
By 10:22 DuBois decided to call in the feds , but the woman on the other end also was locked out of the system . Not totally satisfied with the promise of an application coming in the mail , DuBois got an address where she could talk in person with somebody .
And a few unsuccessful calls later to so-called ObamaCare “ navigators , ” DuBois left at 11:39 a.m. to find the address – only to learn it was a vacant building next to a Holiday Inn Express .
She eventually got a call back at 3:12 p.m. from the United Neighborhood Health Services , but the woman on the other end also was locked out from the website .
“ That ’ s a wrap for day one of exchange enrollment , ” DuBois wrote . “ The search continues . ”
The state-run exchange in Washington state was not on the national radar for potential problems in recent days , but the site experienced hiccups on Tuesday and was still down by midday .
Visitors were greeted with the words “ Connection Refused ” on an otherwise blank , white screen .
Oregon , which has one of country ’ s 16 state-based exchanges , warned residents that anything might happen Tuesday on the site and that they would need the assistance of an insurance agent or other third-party to enroll over the next several weeks .
Sure enough , site visitors on Tuesday were told : “ Online enrollment is coming soon ! Sign up to receive an email notification when it 's available . ”
However , officials ’ worst-case scenario that the site could “ crash and burn ” and they would have to close it down did not happen .
Maryland , which also has a state-run exchange , had technical problems , too , causing a roughly four-hour delay .
Like the federal government , Maryland had already delayed enrollment for small businesses . The new projected start date is early January , delaying coverage until March at the earliest , according to The Washington Post .
Many visitors to the official website for the federally run ObamaCare insurance exchanges were met Tuesday morning with an error message . The site was apparently overloaded with traffic but went live after about 11:30 a.m .
`` We have a lot of visitors on our site right now and we 're working to make your experience here better . Please wait here until we send you to the login page . Thanks for your patience ! '' read a website message .
By mid-morning , the healthcare.gov site declared `` the system is down at the moment , '' and directed would-be participants to contact a call center if they need help immediately .
Thirty four states are either using the federal site or have a state-federal partnership .
Christine Ferguson , director of Rhode Island 's site , recently told reporters that people are working around the clock to meet the Oct. 1. deadline . But she also acknowledged , “ As this unveils , it is going to be very clear that everything ca n't be done on a computer. ” Ferguson predicted the system would get “ a lot more user-friendly ” over the next several months .
The Baa administration tried Thursday to portray its delay of small business ’ s online access as a positive development , saying officials thought that “ taking a little bit of additional time ” was in the best interest of the business owners . But the administration also announced the launch of the Spanish-language version of the federal insurance exchange would be delayed until late October .
Meanwhile , administration and state officials point out that the millions of Americans who want coverage through the federally subsidized Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act can still enroll by phone , mail or third party .
In Nevada , the state-based site also will delay the start of its Spanish-language version . Many of the roughly 600,000 Nevada residents without insurance are Hispanic , but the start of the Spanish version of the Silver State Exchange could be delayed until as late as Nov. 15 .
Oregon -- among the 16 state-based marketplaces or “ exchanges ” – is requiring residents to use an insurance agent or community group to enroll online through at least mid-October .
“ I have no idea what this thing ’ s going to look like Oct. 1 , ” Rocky King , the exchanges executive director , said last week , according to The New York Times . “ We could crash and burn and have to close it down . ”
The District , also running its own exchange , revealed last week that a glitch in its exchange software as it tries to calculate insurance-premium costs when factoring in tax credits , or subsidies , for lower-income customers . Officials also said the site still can not determine who would be eligible for Medicaid , which about half of U.S. states are expanding under ObamaCare .
The state-based , online exchange -- Connect For Health Colorado -- will be live Tuesday for the roughly 700,000 residents without health insurance , but it also will not be fully operational because of problems calculating the subsidies . Customers can still get the subsidies , but not without calling for assistance for at least the first month .
A spokesman for the exchange said the state has hired 180 people to man a call center to help insurance shoppers .
The administration had already given some businesses – those with more than 50 full-time employees – the option to delay coverage .
In June , the White House announced it was delaying the so-called “ employer mandate ” that requires such companies to provide health insurance or pay a penalty . The one-year delay , officials said , was to give employers more time to prepare .