Computer bugs are doing what Ted Cruz couldn ’ t do . They ’ ve crashed Obamacare . Barack Obama has put in a panic call to the Geek Squad . Maybe they can fix it .
This time the Republicans should stand back and watch the sparks fly and listen to the static on the Democratic radio . There ’ s no need to view with alarm or point with pride . If John Boehner and Mitch McConnell want to do something nice , they could send over a few dozen doughnuts and a big pot of latte . The geeks have to take a lunch . Fixing this turkey will require a full day ’ s work .
The president ’ s men ( and the ladies ) say they ’ re calling on “ the best and the brightest ” of Silicon Valley to give the website a root canal . The Department of Health and Human Services — it ’ s the “ human ” part that is the root of the problem — won ’ t say what ’ s wrong with the system , only that the website needs “ a new code that includes bug fixes . ”
Most people say it needs a new health care plan and a new website . Other computer geeks — who sound like they know what they ’ re talking about , but how do the rest of us know ? — insist the problem is fundamental , that the designers of the website used 10-year-old software schemes . Ten years in computer years is a calculation from two centuries back , and for all a computer would know , Matthew Brady sent his photographs from Gettysburg on an Apple IIE , working on DOS with only 64 kilobytes . That sounds like the Obamacare site , and how can anyone fix that ?
Nancy Pelosi tried to warn us . She said there were no congressmen who could read the thousands of pages in the bill , but told her colleagues not to worry : “ We have to pass the bill so you can find out what is in it. ” So Congress passed it , without a worry and without a single Republican vote , and now we ’ re finally finding out what ’ s in it .
Obamacare , which the president says he wants to be the “ signature ” of his presidency , seems designed to fail , and it ’ s the signature answer to the question of what ’ s wrong with Mr. Obama and his presidency . Critics who have been saying he ’ s dangerous because he ’ s a Muslim , a socialist , a Kenyan , or an un-American ingrate miss the point by a mile .
Mr. Obama may be a Christian patriot who is secretly proud of his Confederate forbears on his mother ’ s side ( out of Kentucky through Kansas ) , but his sin is not alien ideology , but native incompetence . The only thing he has done well is organize an administration that reflects the consistent incompetence that underlies everything the administration does . Mr. Obama can ’ t blame George W. Bush for his administration , but he probably does .
When the telephone rang at 3 o ’ clock in the morning , and it was Benghazi calling , he turned over and went back to sleep . He drew a network of red lines across Syria , daring Bashar Assad to cross one of them , and when he did , the president turned American foreign policy in the Middle East over to Vladimir Putin and hoped for the best .
A onetime University of Chicago law professor ought to know better , but every time there ’ s an unfortunate incident on the street with high headline potential , whether in high-minded Massachusetts or high-cracker Florida , the president can ’ t resist putting in his two cents ’ worth and suggesting that the judge should take his word and send the jury home .
Mr. Obama took pride of paternity when Mitt Romney called the health care scheme “ Obamacare , ” and the president assured him that he need not apologize , because he liked the label . Now nearly every Democrat in town takes care to call it the Affordable Care Act , its formal name .
The president is right to call in the high-tech geeks . If they can ’ t fix it before the first of the year ( barely two months from now ) , he ’ ll have to ask for the postponement he so vehemently said was impossible . It ’ s either that or fine everybody for not signing up for something impossible to sign up for .
This is a first in train wrecks . This train hit a southbound freight before it ever got out of the station . Some engineer . Some conductor . Americans will forgive a president a lot , even his politics , if they like the man . They ’ re not so forgiving of incompetence , impotence and inefficiency .
Some of Mr. Obama ’ s severest critics got one thing right . They say his health care scheme was the work of Marxists , and so it is , writ large by Groucho , Chico and Harpo .