Bernie Sanders has spent the first months of the new Congress defending Barack Obama ’ s health reforms as Republicans vowed to repeal them . But after the GOP ’ s seven-year drive to eliminate the Affordable Care Act collapsed on the Senate floor last week , Sanders is ready to introduce his own solution – government-run universal healthcare for all Americans .
'Wait for the show ' : how John McCain helped torpedo the Republican health plan Read more
The Vermont senator will spend the next several weeks leading a campaign to build support for his plan before unveiling the bill next month . On Wednesday , he launched a six-figure digital advertising campaign on Facebook and Google that encourages supporters to become “ citizen co-sponsors ” of his plan , which he calls “ Medicare for All ” , according to Sanders spokesman Josh Miller-Lewis , a reference to the public healthcare program for older Americans .
“ Bottom line is : if other countries around the world are providing quality care to all their people , we can do the same , ” Sanders told NPR in an interview on Tuesday .
“ This is not complicated , ” the Vermont senator , who lost to Hillary Clinton in the Democratic presidential primary last year , said . “ The American people are familiar with Medicare . By and large it ’ s quite a popular program . But it starts now when you are 65 years of age . God didn ’ t create 65 years of age for being the eligibility rate . It should be available for every single person in this country . ”
Sanders has been a longtime advocate of the “ single payer ” system – government-run universal healthcare – and the plan was at the heart of the leftwing , populist agenda that fueled his unexpected rise during the 2016 Democratic primaries . And progressives , emboldened by his success , are eager to seize the moment to push forward their dream of transforming US healthcare .
On Monday night , Sanders sent a message to his supporters asking for ideas on how to shape his Medicare-for-all plan . Within 24 hours , the email had generated 19,000 responses and raised $ 65,000 , Miller-Lewis said .
There are signs that support for a government-run healthcare system is spreading . A survey published in June by the Pew Research Center found that a growing share of Americans support a universal healthcare system . Among all Americans , 33 % support a single-payer approach to healthcare , up five points since a January survey and 12 points since March 2014 .
And support among Democrats is markedly higher , and rising . In January , 43 % of Democrats said they supported a single-payer healthcare system , according to the study . By June , that number rose to 52 % .
Sanders and his team are realistic about the prospects of passing such a plan under a Republican-controlled Congress with Donald Trump in the White House . But they are hoping to galvanize support in anticipation of Democratic successes in future elections .
In a June interview with ███ , Sanders said he expected “ more senators than we ’ ve ever had before ” to sign on to his bill . In 2015 , when he introduced similar legislation , he had no co-sponsors .
Sanders declined then to divulge the number of senators who has already agreed to endorse the bill . But several Democrats have publicly declared their support for a single-payer system , including Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts , who called it the “ next step ” for health , and Kirsten Gillibrand of New York , who has said : “ We should have Medicare for all in this country . ”
The forthcoming legislation will be similar to the proposal Sanders offered during his insurgent campaign , which would have eliminated the country ’ s health insurance programs and replaced them with coverage for everyone administered by the federal government . The plan , which was financed by increased taxes on wealthy Americans , was criticized by some for being too costly and light on policy details .
Sanders ’ mobilization effort will confront the criticisms as part of an educational campaign to introduce the concept of universal care to a public that has long been wary of European-style healthcare systems .
Miller-Lewis said the senator will spend time speaking to voters beyond his base to explain the merits of a universal healthcare system , and to dispel negative assumptions about the approach , such as the concern that it would cause longer wait times for care .
Over the past several months , as Republicans scrambled to find support for a plan to repeal Obamacare , some conservatives warned that the consequence of failing to overhaul the system would be universal healthcare .
A single-payer plan has already been introduced in the House , by congressman John Conyers , a Democrat from Michigan , who has introduced a similar measure in every Congress since 2003 .
When Conyers introduced his latest bill in January , it had 51 co-sponsors . Since then , the number of Democrats signed on to the bill has swelled to 116 , a solid majority of the caucus . The proposal had just 62 co-sponsors in total when Conyers introduced it in 2015 .
During the hours-long Obamacare repeal debate last week , Republican senator Steve Daines of Montana introduced a single-payer plan that Democrats dismissed as a ploy to embarrass vulnerable moderates who represent conservative states .
How does the US healthcare system compare with other countries ? Read more
“ President Trump , the Republicans want to make America great again . The Democrats want to make America like England again , ” Daines said , mocking his own amendment , last week .
Sanders protested against the measure and urged Democrats to vote “ present ” rather than take a position on the bill . The bill failed 0-57 but exposed the inevitable tensions between the progressive and centrist wings of the party .
Four Democrats from states Trump won – Joe Manchin of West Virginia , Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota , Jon Tester of Montana , and Joe Donnelly of Indiana – and one independent , Angus King , joined Republicans in voting against the bill .
Sanders expects an uphill battle but says now is the political moment to wage this fight .
“ Let me be clear , ” Sanders wrote in the email to supporters , “ this will be an enormously difficult and prolonged struggle , and one which will require the efforts of tens of millions of Americans in every state in this country .
“ It will , in fact , require a political revolution in which the American people participate in the political process in a way that we have not seen in the recent history of our democracy . ”