On Friday , Sen. Elizabeth Warren released her Medicare-for-all financing plan . After being attacked at the last Democratic debate for refusing to admit Medicare-for-all would require middle-class tax hikes , Warren wants to show that you can pay for the plan without them .
Warren ’ s financing plan has two parts . The first describes her approach to estimating the costs of Medicare-for-all . The second lays out the way she pays for the plan without , in her words , “ one penny ” of middle-class tax increases .
As befits Warren ’ s wonkish , master-of-plans persona , she ’ s relied in both cases on top experts . Her cost estimate was conducted by Don Berwick , the former director of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ; and Simon Johnson , the former chief economist at the World Bank . Her tax plan was developed by Betsey Stevenson , who served as chief economist at the Labor Department ; Mark Zandi , the head economist at Moody ’ s Analytics ; and Johnson . Helpfully , her plan is backed up by two detailed appendices laying bare , and arguing for , the assumptions Warren makes .
How much will Medicare-for-all cost ? No more than the current system , she says
In pricing out Medicare-for-all , you ’ re pitting two opposing forces against each other . On one side of the ledger , Medicare-for-all gives every legal resident — and , in some versions , nonlegal residents — insurance that covers everything with no deductibles , co-pays , or other forms of cost-sharing . That ’ s going to send health costs shooting skyward .
“ We have an enormous amount of evidence that leaves no doubt in any sensible person ’ s mind that getting rid of cost-sharing provisions increases demand for , and use of , health care , ” says Amy Finkelstein , an MIT economist who has studied coverage expansions extensively .
On the other side of the ledger is the savings the government can wring out of the health system by setting the prices doctors , hospitals , and pharmaceutical companies can charge and by simplifying administration . Given that every other developed country in the world achieves universal coverage at far lower per-person costs than America , we have ample evidence that it is possible to cover everyone with high-quality health care for much , much less than America pays now .
Warren ’ s team begins with a recent estimate produced by the Urban Institute , which concluded that a generous single-payer system would cost $ 59 trillion over 10 years — a $ 7 trillion increase over what we ’ d spend in the absence of reform . Driving that figure is Urban ’ s estimate of a nearly 14 percent increase in health care utilization , which overwhelms the assumed savings .
In effect , Warren ’ s team accepts Urban ’ s estimate for utilization , but it dials up the estimates for savings . The key differences :
Private insurers spend about 12.2 percent on administrative costs and profits . Urban assumes that would fall to 6 percent under single-payer , as that ’ s what Medicare spends now . Warren assumes it will fall to 2.3 percent , as that ’ s what Medicare ’ s single-payer program pays now — the higher number includes the private plans in Medicare Advantage and Medicare Part D. That saves $ 1.8 trillion .
America pays higher prices for the same drugs than other countries . Urban assumes single-payer could cut those costs by about 25-30 percent . Warren proposes cutting payment rates for brand-name drugs by 70 percent . That saves $ 1.7 trillion .
Medicare pays significantly lower rates to physicians and hospitals than private insurers do . Because providers have built their businesses atop the mix of higher private and lower public prices , the fear is that shifting the system to the lower Medicare rates could lead to widespread hospital closures and physician bankruptcies . Urban assumed that single-payer would pay physicians at Medicare rates but hospitals at 115 percent of Medicare ’ s rates . Warren takes hospitals down to 110 percent , saving $ 600 billion .
Warren ’ s finds more than $ 2 trillion in savings from scaling a series of Affordable Care Act-era payment reforms across the single-payer system . These are efforts to move health care away from fee-for-service , but the assumptions here are optimistic . Warren ’ s team projects $ 1.2 trillion in savings from bundled payments , for instance , but a footnote refers to a Congressional Budget Office paper from before the program began in earnest . A 2018 Commonwealth study found no savings from bundled payments , and Medicare has been backing off the program in recent years .
Health spending tends to grow a lot faster than GDP . The government ’ s top actuary projects 5.5 percent growth over the next decade . Urban , in its analysis , assumed 4.5 percent . Warren ’ s team simply asserts that it ’ ll hold growth to 3.9 percent , which is similar to other developed countries . That adds $ 1.1 trillion in savings .
Add all this up and Warren ’ s team projects national health expenditures of $ 52 trillion over 10 years — exactly what ’ s projected in the absence of single-payer . Therefore , Berwick and Johnson conclude , Warren ’ s proposal would “ cover every single resident of the U.S. with much more generous coverage and virtually no cost-sharing at a total cost just under the amount the U.S. is currently set to spend on health care under our existing system . ”
How convincing you find that depends on how convincing you find the underlying assumptions . More on that in a bit . But with the $ 52 trillion figure set , we can see how Warren plans to finance Medicare-for-all .
Between federal , state , and local governments , most US health spending is already publicly financed . Warren shunts all that money toward Medicare-for-all , leaving a $ 20.5 trillion hole over 10 years .
Warren does the same with employer spending . Under the Affordable Care Act ’ s employer mandate , all workplaces with more than 50 employees have to purchase health care or pay a fee . Warren simply takes the money they ’ re spending now and redirects it to Medicare-for-all . To sweeten the deal for employers , she shaves their contribution by 2 percent — so whatever they ’ re spending on private health insurance , they send 98 percent of that to the government .
There ’ s wide variation in the quality of insurance employers purchase , and this plan has the consequence , at the outset , of punishing employers who purchased better insurance for their employees — now they ’ re paying more than stingier competitors , but without any recruiting benefit . Over time , Warren says she ’ ll adjust all employers to the same level , though the details of how that will work are sparse .
There ’ s an even worse inequity for employers with fewer than 50 employees . They ’ re not required under law to provide health insurance , but a bit over half do . Warren ’ s plan says that small businesses “ would be exempt from the Employer Medicare Contribution unless they are already paying for employee health care today. ” That ’ s a fairly direct penalty to small businesses that offer health insurance today : They have to keep paying a cost their competitors have dodged , but paying that cost no longer gives them an advantage in hiring .
Altogether , holding the employer contribution constant gets Warren almost $ 9 trillion . What comes next reads like a grab-bag of tax hikes and policy changes , but taken together , it ’ s an ambitious tax and immigration agenda even if it weren ’ t connected to Medicare-for-all :
Americans currently spend $ 3.7 trillion paying their share of employer-provided health insurance premiums . That money , left in their wallets , becomes taxable , adding $ 1.4 trillion .
Warren proposes a financial transactions tax of 0.1 percent of the value of every stock , bond , or derivatives transaction . That raises $ 800 billion . Then she adds a “ systemic risk fee ” on financial institutions with more than $ 50 billion in assets . That ’ s another $ 100 billion .
Warren adds another $ 2.9 trillion in corporate taxes by ending accelerated cost recovery and imposing a 35 percent minimum tax on foreign earnings .
Prior to this plan , Warren ’ s wealth tax was 2 percent on assets over $ 50 million and 3 percent on assets over $ 1 billion . Sorry , billionaires — now it ’ s 6 percent , which raises another $ 1 trillion . Warren also proposes taxing capital gains for the top 1 percent at the same rate as normal income , and doing so on an annual basis , rather than just when the sale is made . That raises $ 2 trillion .
Warren proposes a massive increase in IRS enforcement aimed at reducing the tax avoidance rate from 15 percent to 10 percent . If successful , this could raise $ 2.3 trillion .
In literally two sentences , Warren proposes passing comprehensive immigration reform , which would lead to $ 400 billion in new taxable income over 10 years . I guess , technically , this would be a middle-class tax increase but not in the way anyone means .
She also gets rid of the Overseas Contingency Operations Fund , which is basically a temporary increase in defense spending that ’ s become permanent . You can read more about OCO funds here , but the bottom line is it saves $ 800 billion .
Together , those changes would raise $ 20.5 trillion over 10 years , financing the rest of Warren ’ s projected Medicare costs .
Bob Laszewski is president of the consulting firm Health Policy and Strategy Associates , and he ’ s either worked in or studied the American health care system for 47 years . What we have , he says , is “ a health care industrial complex , ” a rival in both size and might to the military-industrial complex President Dwight Eisenhower warned of . And Warren is taking the entire thing on at once .
Every dollar in waste or pricing is somebody ’ s profit , job , or loan repayment . It makes the kinds of pricing cuts Warren wants to make , at the speed she wants to make them , incredibly difficult . “ The health care industrial complex has grown with unfettered , unregulated access to cash , ” says Laszewski . “ Look at a picture of your hospital from 20 years ago . Look at it compared to this campus you have today . If you crank the reimbursement rates , it ’ ll be like slamming on the brakes on an 18-wheeler going down the interstate . ”
To pass the Affordable Care Act , President Barack Obama and the Democrats tried to systematically neutralize potential sources of industry opposition . They cut deals with the insurance industry , the pharmaceutical industry , the hospital industry . They tried to limit disruption as best they could . Those deals might not have been their ideal policy , but they were working in the shadow of Bill Clinton ’ s failed 1994 reforms , which collapsed under an industry onslaught , among other problems .
Warren ’ s courting the fight Obama dodged . “ In 2017 alone , health industry players whose profiteering would end under Medicare-for-all unleashed more than 2,500 lobbyists on Washington , ” she writes . “ These industries will spend freely on shady TV ads and lobbying to convince people that a program that saves them massive sums of money will somehow cost them money . ”
There ’ s another set of problems Warren doesn ’ t address around supply . So far , Warren and others have treated the expanded utilization as a cost problem . But it ’ s also a supply problem . Warren promises repeatedly that you ’ ll be able to see the doctor and go to the hospital of your choice , but if your doctor is overwhelmed by patients or your hospital can ’ t schedule your surgery for six weeks , it ’ s not going to feel that way .
A plan that does this much to increase demand for health services needs to do some thinking about how to increase supply — ideally , we ’ ll need more doctors , nurse practitioners , and so on . In polling I ’ ve seen , and having been around the health care debate for years , I suspect that the attack line with the most potency is the dread specter of waiting lines .
Still , there ’ s no doubt that if you could force enough change on the system , and you could convince people to hold on through the disruptive transition , we could have a system that covered everyone for less than we pay now . We see it in all our competitor nations . At the core of Warren ’ s case is the simple idea that a much better health system is possible , and on that , she ’ s right .
But what lies between here and there is the same set of political problems that have bedeviled reformers for the last 100 years . Which is why , of all the assumptions and gambles embedded in Warren ’ s plan , it ’ s the animating political theory that is the most significant : Like Sen. Bernie Sanders , she intends to pass health reform by running over the health care industrial complex and every corporation and billionaire in America .
This , I ’ ve come to think , is what the Democrats are really arguing over when they debate Medicare-for-all . Sanders and Warren believe the path to reform is a program big enough to inspire the American people to dismiss the cries of opposition . The compromises you make to calm backlash are also compromises that disillusion your own supporters . The more traditional Democrats on the stage , like former Vice President Joe Biden , Sen. Amy Klobuchar , and South Bend , Indiana , Mayor Pete Buttigieg , argue that you can ’ t take every special interest and corporation on at once , or you ’ ll never pass anything through Congress . In their view , it ’ s not that more incremental plans are better than more ambitious plans , but that plans that can pass are better than plans that will fail .
But Warren ’ s view on this is clear . “ You don ’ t get what you don ’ t fight for , ” she says . And she wants the fight .