More than a quarter of Obamacare enrollees say they ’ ve been negatively affected by the law , according to a study released Thursday that finds deeply partisan views of the 2010 overhaul persist .
The Kaiser Family Foundation said 27 percent of people with plans from the law ’ s marketplace felt worse off , while 53 percent said they had benefitted .
The numbers changed little when the survey isolated people who received government subsidies to help them pay for coverage , with 57 percent saying they benefitted and 25 percent holding a negative view .
The findings were part of an extensive study on people in the non-group market , or people who got insurance on their own — either on an Obamacare exchange or on the open market — and not through a job or public program .
Kaiser said six out of 10 people in this market held a plan through the marketplace set up under the Affordable Care Act .
Among the non-group market overall , more than half of Republicans ( 55 percent ) said they ’ ve been negatively affected by Obamacare , while only 19 percent reported a benefit .
The numbers swung the other way among Democrats , with nearly two-thirds reporting a benefit and 12 percent feeling slighted by the law .
The partisan divide is consistent with prior Obamacare polling and reflects the atmosphere on Capitol Hill , where congressional Republicans are pushing to repeal President Obama ’ s signature law through a fast-track budget tool or by leveraging a Supreme Court decision , due by June , that could gut the law by striking down its subsidies in at least 34 states .
The study also found that three quarters of Obamacare customers are satisfied with their coverage , although a large share still worry about their medical costs , particularly if they have a deductible above $ 1,500 .
Nearly seven in 10 people who hold Obamacare-compliant plans said they didn ’ t bother to shop around when they renewed their 2014 coverage for this year , even though the law was designed to compel Americans to find the best deal from year to year .
Among those who blindly renewed , about a third said they were satisfied with their coverage , and one in 10 said they were too busy to shop around .