Congress Passes Spending Bill To Avoid Shutdown , Again Punts On Health Care
With the clock ticking , Congress on Friday managed to fulfill its basic function — keeping the federal government running .
The House and Senate approved a short-term measure that funds the government for another week . Lawmakers voted hours ahead of a midnight deadline to avoid a partial shutdown of federal agencies .
Friday 's extension gives members of Congress more time — until midnight on May 5 — to try to reach a deal on a spending bill that will last through the rest of fiscal year 2017 , which ends Sept. 30 .
`` We 're willing to extend things for a little bit more time in hopes that the same sort of progress can be made , '' said Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer .
The vote caps a dramatic week of deal-making on Capitol Hill , particularly in the House .
Although Republicans control all the levers of power in Washington , Democrats had significant leverage in the spending talks and used it to win concessions from the White House .
Monday night , President Trump dropped his demand that the spending bill include a down-payment for his long-promised wall along the U.S.-Mexico border . Democrats said they would not support any bill that included wall funding .
The White House later retreated from its threat to stop paying federal subsidies to health insurers that help cover low-income Americans under the Affordable Care Act .
If Congress had n't approved the spending bill , the government shutdown would have taken effect on Saturday — President Trump 's 100th day in office .
`` I think the president is learning that the all-powerful position of the presidency is not the end-all , '' said Rep. Joe Crowley , chairman of the House Democratic Caucus . `` There is an equal co-branch of government called the legislature , and when it 's properly exercised , it gives an [ opportunity ] for the minority from time to time to play a role . ''
Health care victory eludes Trump in his first 100 days
Members of Congress left Washington on Friday without voting on the GOP 's revised health care bill .
The updated legislation would allow states to opt out of some of the Affordable Care Act 's mandates — including the benefits health insurers must cover in their policies and the ban on allowing insurance companies to charge more based on a person 's age and health status .
`` It gives states more flexibility and tools to decrease premiums and increases choices , '' House Speaker Paul Ryan told reporters during his weekly briefing . `` And it does this while maintaining and preserving protections for people with preexisting conditions . ''
House GOP leaders faced pressure from the Trump administration to schedule a vote on the bill this week . The White House was eager to claim it as a legislative victory within Trump 's 100th-day marker .
But the GOP 's vote-counting team struggled to find the support needed to pass the measure , especially among centrist Republicans . The House Freedom Caucus ' endorsement of the bill made the divide all the more pronounced . That bloc of roughly three-dozen hard-line conservative Republicans helped sideline the party 's previous attempt .
House Democrats had threatened to block the spending bill this week if Republicans attempted to vote on the health care legislation .
Still , support from the Freedom Caucus injected the GOP effort with a shot of momentum and put political pressure on moderate House Republicans to fall in line . The dynamic fueled tension within the party .
`` There 's frustration that we are here where we are because of the Freedom Caucus stand three weeks ago , '' said Rep. Chris Collins , R-N.Y. `` And now the hot potato has moved to those of us that are typically the ones that cast the tough votes all the time — whether it 's [ voting to raise ] the debt ceiling or it 's keeping the government open . ''
House Speaker Ryan says he 'll bring the new health care bill up for a vote only when it has enough support to pass . It 's not clear when or if that will happen with the legislation in its current form .
The renewed rift over health care will likely color next week 's negotiations over the longer spending bill , as lawmakers face yet another precarious bout of brinkmanship .