Senate Democrats may one day regret making good on their promise to go nuclear . Obstructionism vs. ACA
President Barack Obama ’ s attempted escape from the Obamacare rollout is all about Republican obstructionism .
One week after cratering polls and fleeing Democrats spurred a long tortured apology , the president was back at the podium to stop playing defense .
Obama invoked George Washington , but the sense was more John Paul Jones — he has not yet begun to fight .
For three weeks during the government shutdown , Obama kept his hold on Americans by asking people to reject Republicans who he said were more interested in causing chaos than governing . That ’ s what he returned to Thursday .
“ Obstruction , ” “ abuse , ” “ harmful ” — Obama used them all to describe what Republicans in the Senate have been doing by filibustering his nominees . But his takeaway was even simpler : it ’ s just wrong .
“ It ’ s not what our Founders envisioned , ” he said . “ A deliberate and determined effort to obstruct everything , no matter what the merits , just to refight the results of an election is not normal . ”
To opponents , Obama endorsed a power grab that overturns nearly a century of tradition . There are people who ’ ve worried about his dreams of an imperial government from the day he launched his presidential campaign in Springfield , but there ’ s no winning those people for Obama .
The president needed to win back the people who used to see him as the embodiment of rational competence , and whose support has been dying the death of a hundred thousand Error 404 messages . He didn ’ t discuss the Affordable Care Act , a website , a broken promise of people being able to keep their coverage . He barely mentioned the judicial nominees whose failure to get confirmed were the immediate cause of the showdown .
Obama ’ s sending a welcome message to core supporters that he ’ s not done yet , and not letting the GOP define who he is or what he does . No more will he be the man slowly consumed by the Obamacare disaster blob or look less and less like a person in control of running the country or his administration .
“ Today , by action , if the Senate carries out its constitutional responsibilities by voting on presidential appointments , that ’ s a victory for the president , ” said Sen. Ben Cardin ( D-Md . ) , saying he believes the vote gives Obama ’ s presidency a jolt . “ He knows he ’ ll get his team in place now , he ’ ll get his judges confirmed . ”
Sen. Lindsey Graham ( R-S.C. ) , though , issued an apocalyptic warning that the result will allow what he called rubber-stamp judges to inoculate his administration against any Obamacare lawsuits and let the president escape the truth on Benghazi which the senator hoped to force by putting holds on nominees .
Senate Democrats may one day — even as soon as the first week of January 2015 — regret making good on their promise to respond to years of potshots by going nuclear . They may regret putting vulnerable members of their conference in front of red state voters next year who ’ ll now be charged with abusing the minority . But the political calculation that getting the Senate under control , and helping the president recover so he doesn ’ t poison any hopes of holding the majority isn ’ t that complicated : Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) put his nuclear key in , and the president was right behind him with his own .
Just two days ago , Obama delivered an exhausted defense of his entire presidency at a Wall Street Journal forum , justifying where he ’ s come up short and pointing out where he feels he ’ s been denied credit for successes . Thursday , he turned the argument back on Republicans : they ’ re the ones who stopped gun control , who won ’ t move immigration , who ’ ve repeatedly harmed the economy . They ’ re the ones who hurt the environment by trying to stop his EPA nominee , they ’ re the ones who are leaving the aftermath of the housing market collapse without a federal regulator .
“ This isn ’ t obstruction on substance , on qualifications , ” Obama said . “ It ’ s just to gum up the works . ”