Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius has touted `` dramatic '' improvement in the federal health exchange website since its flawed rollout , but is advising potential customers to use the site during `` off-peak hours '' as she warns it will not work smoothly for everyone .
In an opinion piece published Monday in USA Today , Sebelius says that Healthcare.gov `` is now working smoothly for the vast majority of users . '' However , Sebelius warns that `` there will be exceptions , and ( as with any website ) we will continue to make improvements . ''
Later in the piece , Sebelius tells those Americans who have had issues with the site to `` please do not give up . There is help available , '' before giving the number for the site 's call center . The secretary also advises browsers to visit the site in the morning , in the evening , or on weekends when there is less traffic . She also touts an online queuing system in which users can elect to have an e-mail sent to them when less traffic makes the site more manageable .
Administration officials said early Sunday that they have fixed roughly 400 computer “ bugs ” and increased capacity so the site can now handle more than 800,000 users daily with an error rate of less than 1 percent .
Jeff Zients , the White House official appointed to fix the ObamaCare site since its disastrous Oct. 1 rollout , said it is “ night and day from what it was . ”
Julie Bataille , a Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services spokeswoman , said the site is “ vastly improved , ” compared to where it was five weeks ago . Still , both acknowledged more work needs to be done now that the administration ’ s self-imposed , Nov. 30 deadline has passed .
Officials also said the site can now handle 50,000 users at once and has about 90 percent stability . Congressional Republicans said that the site was still not up to standard , with Michigan Rep. Mike Rogers saying `` It still doesn ’ t function right ... The security of this site … doesn ’ t meet the minimum standards of the private sector . ”