Is Obamacare a blessing for the federal budget ? Or a burden ?
Democrats promise trillions in savings . Republicans swear the law will bankrupt the country .
Will it reduce deficits or not ? When the Affordable Care Act passed in March 2010 , the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office estimated that it would reduce deficits by more than $ 100 billion in the first decade , and by considerably more in the second decade -- by half a percent of economic growth . A half percent of GDP over a decade could mean reducing deficits by more than $ 1 trillion .
So , what 's the problem ? The CBO 's estimate assumes that the law would be adhered to exactly as written .
The CBO itself noted that the ACA would `` put into effect a number of policies that might be difficult to sustain over a long period of time . ''
A number of changes have already been made , and more are being proposed -- some of which could diminish the law 's deficit-reduction potential .
For instance , there 's a push to repeal Obamacare 's tax on medical devices . The tax is expected to raise about $ 30 billion over the next decade .
And there is concern that Congress could have a hard time adhering to various cost containment provisions in the law , said Joshua Gordon , policy director of the Concord Coalition , a deficit watchdog group .
If lawmakers keep messing with the law , then what ? It depends on what they do -- but they could end up adding to deficits .
What if , for instance , they phase out key provisions intended to restrain spending growth in Medicare and do n't implement a policy to slow the growth of health insurance subsidies ?
The Government Accountability Office did a long-range simulation that included these and other assumptions about the broader budget .
In such a scenario , the GAO found that deficits would go up 0.7 % of GDP over the next 75 years . That would be due in large part to increased spending on Medicaid , the Children 's Health Insurance Program and subsidies offered on the health insurance exchanges .
When will we know who 's right ? It may be awhile . Obamacare is a very complex law with lots of moving parts that phase in ( and out ) over time .
Already , growth in national health spending -- of which federal spending is a big part -- has fallen to a record low rate . The CBO and economists think part of that slowing is attributable directly or indirectly to the ACA , but it 's unclear how much . And the growth rate is expected to rise in the next few years as more people become insured under Obamacare .
It also remains to be seen whether the new health insurance exchanges will draw a diverse pool of enrollees and generate enough competition to fulfill the law 's promise of providing affordable health care for most Americans .
What makes Gordon optimistic that Obamacare can help improve the country 's fiscal outlook long-term are the changes that hospitals , doctors and insurance companies are already making in attempts to slow cost growth .
`` Underneath this surface fight over Obamacare , there 's a huge amount of change and consensus on different ways to slow down health care costs and shift to a value-based health care system , '' Gordon said .
So what stokes his pessimism ? The prospect that Congress could muck things up .