Wednesday on his nationally syndicated radio show , conservative talker Rush Limbaugh criticized Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell for his failure to repeal Obamacare as Republicans have control of the White House , the U.S. Senate and the U.S. House of Representatives .
Limbaugh ’ s criticism echoed that of President Donald Trump reacting to McConnell ’ s statement that Trump had “ excessive expectations ” when it came to the law ’ s repeal .
Senator Mitch McConnell said I had `` excessive expectations , '' but I do n't think so . After 7 years of hearing Repeal & Replace , why not done ?
LIMBAUGH : Okay . Here ’ s Senator McConnell . This is in Florence , Kentucky . He was addressing the Rotary Club .
MCCONNELL : I know everybody saying , “ You ’ ve been there , haven ’ t done anything , ” which , uhhhh , I find extremely irritating .
MCCONNELL : Part of the reason I think that the storyline is that we haven ’ t done much is because , in part , the president and others have set these early timelines about things need to be done by a certain point . Now , our new president , of course , has not been in this line of work before .
MCCONNELL : Part of the reason I think people feel like we ’ re under — underperforming is because too many kind of artificial deadlines unrelated to the reality or complexity of legislating may not have been fully understood .
LIMBAUGH : There you go . He also said that the expectations were too high . But so you see here , “ Well , the president set these early timelines . He ’ s a new president who has not been in this line of work before . Part of the reason I think people feel that we ’ re underperforming , too me artificial… ” No , no , no . Senator , it doesn ’ t matter that Trump is president . It doesn ’ t matter ! For seven years , Republicans everywhere have been promising — except for Kasich ( snorts ) — to repeal and replace Obamacare . And with every election victory , another excuse was offered .
When you get the House back ? “ Well , we can ’ t really do it ’ til we get the Senate. ” ( chuckling ) So Republican voters gave you the Senate , and then after that the excuse was , “ Well , Obama ’ s still gon na veto it . We really can ’ t do anything. ” We started getting the idea you don ’ t want to replace Obamacare . You don ’ t want to repeal it or replace it because the excuses for not doing so were rapid fire . I mean , it didn ’ t take long after each victory for another excuse to be launched .
Now it ’ s , “ We don ’ t have 60 votes in the Senate . ”
It ’ s nothing to do with artificial timelines or the president not being in this line of work . I don ’ t know how this is gon na fly . I don ’ t know how the Rotary Club in Florence , Kentucky , took this . But I ’ ll tell you , I ’ ve had a thought . As I said , I know Senator McConnell and I ’ ve spoken to him . He ’ s been very helpful over the course of recent years . There have been phone calls not on the air , but about legislation , about Senate procedure and so forth . He ’ s been educational in that regard . But I ’ ll tell you , something I can ’ t overlook .
Okay , we ’ ve got Collins and Murkowski . Where is the effort to turn them ? Where is the effort to go get… ? Okay , if you ’ ve got 52 Republicans and , say , six of them are not really on board with the other 46 , where ’ s the leadership effort to go to them and do what you can to get ’ em on team , get ’ em on board ? Or do you just sit there , “ Well , Collins , she ’ s never going to vote for it . No way. ” Why have leadership ? Maybe there are efforts to turn them ; I don ’ t know . But it just doesn ’ t seem like there are . I mean , when you boil it all down , it just seems inescapable that the Senate and the House majority do not want to repeal Obamacare . That ’ s what ’ s obvious .