The Obama administration unveiled simplified forms Tuesday for health insurance benefits coming next year under the federal health care overhaul , as a new poll shows many Americans are confused by ObamaCare or do not even know it 's the law of the land .
The poll released by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that 4 in 10 Americans are unaware ObamaCare was signed into law . Some think it 's been repealed by Congress , but , in fact , it 's still on track .
The poll also revealed that about half of the American public , 49 percent , say they do not have enough information about ObamaCare to understand how it will impact their own family .
Obama hailed the simplified forms as an example of how his team listened to criticism from consumer groups and made a fix at a news conference Tuesday . The law 's benefits will be available to all Americans , he emphasized , even if Republicans in Congress still insist on repeal , and many GOP governors wo n't help put it into place .
The biggest change : a five-page short form that single people can fill out . That total includes a cover page with instructions , and an extra page to fill out if you want to designate someone to help you through the process .
However , the application form for families still runs to 12 pages , although most households will not have to fill out each and every page .
When the first draft of the application turned out to be a clunker , `` immediately , everybody sat around the table and said , ` Well , this is too long , especially ... in this age of the Internet , '' ' Obama recounted . `` ` People are n't going to have the patience to sit there for hours on end . Let 's streamline this thing . '' '
His administration is open to making improvements , Obama added : `` Those kinds of refinements , we 're going to be working on . ''
Consumers will start getting familiar with the new applications less than six months from now , on Oct. 1 , when new insurance markets open for enrollment in every state . Most people with job-based benefits will not have to bother with the applications , only the uninsured .
Under the law , middle-class people who do n't get coverage through their jobs will be able to purchase private insurance . Most will be able to get tax credits , based on their incomes , to make their premiums more affordable . Low-income uninsured people will be steered to government programs like Medicaid .
Benefits begin Jan. 1 , and nearly 30 million uninsured Americans are eventually expected to get coverage .
While the first drafts of the applications were widely panned , the new forms were seen as an improvement . Still , consumers must provide a snapshot of their finances to see if they qualify for help . That potentially includes multiple sources of income -- from alimony , to tips , to regular paychecks .
`` Given the amount of information necessary to determine eligibility , it 's hard to see how the forms could be any shorter , '' said Robert Laszewski , a former insurance executive turned industry consultant .
Activist Ron Pollack , executive director of Families USA , is an administration ally who had openly criticized the first draft of the forms , worrying that consumers would get discouraged just trying to fill them out . He called the changes `` very positive . ''
`` There has got to be a balance to between getting adequate ( financial ) information to make sure everybody gets the help they 're entitled to under the law , while at the same time trying to keep the process consumer-friendly , '' said Pollack .
Although the new forms are shorter , the administration was n't able to get rid of all the complexity . Individuals will have to gather tax returns , pay stubs and other financial records before filling out the application .
Administration officials expect most consumers to apply online through the new insurance marketplaces in each state . A single application process will serve to route consumers to either private plans or the Medicaid program . Identification , citizenship and immigration status , as well as income details , are supposed to be verified in close to real time through a federal `` data hub '' that will involve pinging Social Security , Homeland Security and the Internal Revenue Service .
Currently , applying for health insurance individually entails filling out a lengthy questionnaire about your health . Under Obama 's overhaul , insurers will no longer be able to turn away the sick , or charge them more . The health care questions will disappear , but they 'll be replaced by questions about your income . Consumers who underestimate their incomes could be in for an unwelcome surprise later on in the form of smaller tax refunds .
`` Consumers will have a simple , easy-to-understand way to apply for health coverage later this year , '' said Medicare chief Marilyn Tavenner , also overseeing the rollout of the health care law . She said the application is `` significantly shorter than industry standards . ''
Among the sections eliminated in the new form was one that asked applicants if they also wanted to register to vote . Some congressional Republicans had criticized that , calling it politically motivated .