Leftists are crowing about a new public survey that they claim shows robust , or even overwhelming , support for single-payer healthcare -- which they refer to as `` Medicare for All . '' As usual , whenever Medicare is invoked in this context , it is imperative to note the mathematical reality that the existing program is currently on an express train to insolvency , according to government accountants . Undaunted , an increasing number of Democrats are determined to take the financially-doomed program for seniors and massively expand it to the entire population . And look , they say , it 's popular :
When people are told that Medicare for All would “ guarantee health insurance as a right for all Americans , ” support shoots up to 71 percent . https : //t.co/cVOvakOZpO — Keith Ellison ( @ keithellison ) January 23 , 2019
Overall , a majority of Americans ( 56/42 ) initially favor `` Medicare for All . '' But as I 've argued repeatedly , and will continue to argue , this is a disastrous policy . It would ( 1 ) uproot well over 150,000,000 Americans from their existing healthcare arrangements , ( 2 ) hand much more unaccountable power over to an unresponsive and often incompetent federal bureaucracy , ( 3 ) inevitably increase wait times for care through rationing , ( 4 ) deeply hamper America 's world-leading innovation in the critical field of medical technology , and ( 5 ) require truly enormous tax increases on every single American worker and family . How might those , shall we say , `` policy tradeoffs '' sit with voters ? Not well :
Survey shows support for 'Medicare for all ’ plunges when people are asked if they ’ d pay higher taxes or put up with treatment delays to get it . https : //t.co/DgIKAQYOsG — AP Politics ( @ AP_Politics ) January 23 , 2019
The poll found that Americans initially support “ Medicare-for-all , ” 56 percent to 42 percent . However , those numbers shifted dramatically when people were asked about the potential impact , pro and con . Support increased when people learned “ Medicare-for-all ” would guarantee health insurance as a right ( 71 percent ) and eliminate premiums and reduce out-of-pocket costs ( 67 percent ) . But if they were told that a government-run system could lead to delays in getting care or higher taxes , support plunged to 26 percent and 37 percent , respectively . “ The issue that will really be fundamental would be the tax issue , ” said Robert Blendon , a professor at the Harvard T.H . Chan School of Public Health who reviewed the poll . He pointed out that state single-payer efforts in Vermont and Colorado failed because of concerns about the tax increases needed to put them in place .
Democrats inveighed against the GOP-passed tax reform law of 2017 by warning -- falsely -- that it was a tax increase on the middle class , eventually shifting to complain that the middle class tax cuts were n't permanent ( before voting en masse against making them permanent ) . In light of the political anathema that is hiking taxes on the non- '' rich , '' let there be no mistake : Single-payer health care would absolutely , positively force tax rates much higher on middle income and working class Americans . Please recall this menu of ugly options to cover the annual ( ! ) $ 3.2 to $ 3.8 trillion price tag ( for context , the entire federal budget in 2017 was $ 4 trillion ) of `` Medicare for All , '' which would bend the total American healthcare cost curve upward by four-to-six trillion dollars over its first decade alone :
The Mercatus Study -- like others -- shows that `` Medicare for All '' would require a federal tax hike of roughly 10 % of GDP even after capturing state govt . savings .
But capturing the savings to families into a `` single-payer tax '' is not easy -- which is why Sanders comes up short pic.twitter.com/Etfjk22sQc — Brian Riedl ( @ Brian_Riedl ) July 30 , 2018
Perhaps the most efficient way to achieve that would be to combine the top three revenue generators listed : Raise the payroll tax ( paid for by workers and employers ) by ten percentage points for everyone , impose a brand new 20 percent national VAT/sales tax , and hike income tax rates across the board by ten percentage points . Not one of those three ; all of those three . That is an extraordinary , radical , humongous package of tax increases on virtually all Americans . Please notice that cobbling together a string of more populist `` fair share '' nibblings that tend to poll better would result in woefully insufficient revenues .
If the general concept of tax increases to pay for single-payer drags public support down into the 30 's , how would the bruising blend of hikes mentioned above go over with Mr. and Mrs . Taxpayer ? As for delays in treatment , that consequence is an unavoidable side effect of government-run systems , as we 've seen at the VA , and in places like Great Britain ( where entire types of surgeries are sometimes postponed nationwide for months , with even more drastic measures being debated ) , and Canada . Americans would have their existing plans canceled , be given far fewer options , wait longer ( already polling at 26 percent ) for care , and relinquish decision-making power to a centralized government machine under `` Medicare for All . '' And that 's even if we somehow had a realistic or palatable way to pay for it , which we do n't .
There 's a reason why this idea crashed and burned in Colorado , was abandoned in uber-liberal Vermont , and would shatter California 's broken budget . The failed state-level experiments are already speaking for themselves -- loudly . I 'll leave you with a useful refutation of the deeply misleading statistics that are often invoked to justify demolishing America 's world-class healthcare status quo in favor of a government supremacist regime .