With the Republican health care bill apparently dead , congressional Democrats are brainstorming their own ideas for how to transform the health insurance system in case they take back power .
Sen. Bernie Sanders ( I-VT ) has captivated the base with a cry for Medicare-for-all , but other Senate Democrats worry his proposal — which envisions a vast overnight transformation of the health care system — will be difficult to pull off .
Now , Sen. Chris Murphy ( D-CT ) , the latest entrant into the Democratic health care sweepstakes , says he is preparing a plan that would serve as a bridge between the current health care system and the single-payer system that has increasingly become the key demand of the party ’ s base .
Murphy ’ s idea : Allow every American , both individuals and companies , to purchase Medicare . Murphy ’ s hope is that if enough people purchase Medicare — and Murphy is confident they will en masse if they can — then the private health insurance would begin to shrink gradually . As a result , the government will swallow more and more of the private health insurance markets , setting up the trajectory for achieving a single-payer system .
“ I have a feeling if everybody could buy into Medicare , people would choose to do so — and then you ’ d naturally transition to a single-payer system without a massive political fight , ” Murphy said in an interview on Friday , citing opinion polls showing the popularity of the government program .
The plan is similar to a “ public option ” — an idea that was nixed from Obamacare by Murphy ’ s predecessor , Sen. Joe Lieberman ( I-CT ) — in that it also offers a government alternative to , rather than a replacement that would outlaw , private health insurance .
Murphy ’ s plan , first reported by Politico , follows alternative proposals from Sen. Brian Schatz ( D-HI ) and Sen. Sanders and comes as Democrats have moved with astonishing speed to embrace single-payer health insurance . But while Murphy casts his bill as an on-ramp to single-payer , it has important differences with Sanders ’ s bill — differences that make it simultaneously less ambitious , but also perhaps more feasible , than the Vermont senator ’ s proposal .
To understand why Murphy is casting his proposal as a more feasible way to single-payer , you need to understand Sanders ’ s plan .
Sanders ’ s bill , set to be released on Wednesday , is expected to create a single government insurer to give Medicare free of charge to everyone in the country with virtually no copayments and no-deductibles . ( Sanders ’ s Medicare-for-all bill is rumored to mirror a similar package from Rep. John Conyers ( D-MI ) in the House , explained at length here . ) It would do so very quickly .
The clear upside of Sanders ’ s model is in ensuring the government provides universal coverage to all Americans free of cost ; the downside is that it would require significant tax increases upfront , and force the 150 million Americans who currently get their insurance from their employer to join the government plan . Sanders advocates argue that the private health insurance should be eradicated
Sen. Schatz ’ s plan calls for every American to be able to buy into Medicaid . Medicaid ’ s benefits are more generous than Medicare , which may make it more appealing than Murphy ’ s plan ; however , it is run by the states and thus leaves some experts worried that Republican governors could torpedo the effort to ensure the poor have adequate care .
Murphy ’ s plan tries to chart a third course . The Connecticut senator ’ s bill certainly would be less disruptive — engendering less opposition from private insurers — and it would also certainly represent a massive expansion of the government ’ s role in giving Americans insurance .
But one huge problem about Murphy ’ s plan is whether it would truly achieve universal coverage . Twenty-eight million Americans still don ’ t have insurance , including many who couldn ’ t or wouldn ’ t afford the deductibles and premiums of the insurers on the government exchanges . Medicare as it currently exists , rather than how Sanders would transform it , has significant cost-sharing — which means Murphy ’ s plan might price some people out .
“ The question is if you need additional cost-sharing to make it affordable to people with middle incomes , ” Murphy said , adding he was open to the idea . “ You ’ d build it on top of the subsidies in the Affordable Care Act .
Murphy noted that he may wind up co-sponsoring Sanders ’ s bill , as did Schatz . “ If I were building a health care system , from scratch , I ’ d start with a single-payer system , ” he said .
Murphy has met with Sanders to discuss his alternative plan , according to a source with knowledge of that conversation . After all , Murphy said the two have the same goal .
“ I think Medicare buy-in gets you to a single-payer system . This may be the fastest way to a single-payer system , ” Murphy told me .