CLOSE House speaker Paul Ryan explained his decision for cancelling a vote on the GOP bill to replace Obamacare . USA TODAY
WASHINGTON — In a stunning defeat for Republicans , House Speaker Paul Ryan on Friday canceled a vote on the GOP bill to replace Obamacare because he did not have enough votes from his own members to pass the legislation .
`` We came really close today , but we came up short , '' Ryan said at a news conference after he pulled the bill from the House floor . `` I will not sugarcoat this : This is a disappointing day for us . Doing big things is hard . ''
Ryan and other Republican leaders said they will now move on from health care to tax reform , Southwest border control and other issues , essentially giving up on their No . 1 legislative priority for the foreseeable future .
`` Obamacare is the law of the land , '' Ryan said . `` It ’ s going to remain the law of the land . ''
The failure to pass the bill is a major blow to both Ryan and President Trump in their efforts to rack up Republican accomplishments now that they control both Congress and the White House . It was the first big legislative test for Republicans since they won back the White House and retained control of the House and Senate in last fall 's election .
It also underscored just how divided the Republican Party is , with factions of hardline conservatives and moderates rebelling against their own leadership .
Repealing and replacing Obamacare was a major campaign promise made by Trump and scores of GOP House members and candidates in last year ’ s election . But they were never able to agree on the best way to achieve their goal .
Trump threw his weight behind the Republicans ' replacement bill , cajoling and strong-arming House members to vote for the bill . Ryan also made it his top legislative priority , exhorting members to take action on what he called their best chance to replace Obamacare ’ s government mandates with a patient-driven system .
`` We were very close , '' Trump told reporters after the vote was canceled . Ryan said he had told Trump at a midday meeting that they should scrap the vote and Trump had agreed . But Trump said he did not blame conservatives in his own party who would not vote for the bill . “ I ’ m disappointed , because we could have had it , '' he said . `` I ’ m a little surprised , to be honest with you . ”
He also blamed Democrats , saying that passing the bill without them was a `` very difficult thing to do . '' He said Democrats now `` own '' Obamacare and must take responsibility for its problems .
`` They own it ; 100 % own it , '' Trump said . He said he will do what he talked about on the campaign trail and “ let Obamacare explode . ”
Rep. Luke Messer of Indiana , a member of the House GOP leadership team , declared health care dead for the year . Moreover , he said , it will be harder to get tax reform done now in the wake of the GOP ’ s failure to pass their health proposal .
But Democrats rejoiced . House Speaker Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , called it `` a victory for all Americans . ''
`` Democrats , united by our shared values , have stood strong against the disastrous TrumpCare bill , '' she said .
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , said the bill failed because Trump could n't close the deal .
`` They can ’ t write policy that actually makes sense , they can ’ t implement the policies they do manage to write , they can ’ t get their stories straight , and today we ’ ve learned that they can ’ t close a deal , and they can ’ t count votes , '' Schumer said . `` So much for the Art of the Deal . ''
Rep. Jim Jordan , R-Ohio , a leader of the conservative House Freedom Caucus that helped kill the bill , said Republicans should not give up on getting rid of the Affordable Care Act . Many members of the caucus said the GOP leadership 's American Health Care Act did not go far enough in repealing Obamacare 's government mandates .
`` Obamacare is a disaster , and repealing it remains one of my top priorities , '' he said after the vote was canceled . `` Now , House Republicans owe it to our constituents to immediately get back to the drawing board and bring forward a bolder effort to replace the failing Obamacare with a plan to reduce costs by increasing choice and competition . ''
Lawmakers debated the bill on the House floor for more than five hours Friday before Ryan made the decision to cancel the vote .
The debate began after the House Rules Committee adopted changes to the bill that had been negotiated Thursday between Trump and House Republicans that would , among other things , eliminate minimum requirements for insurance plans to cover 10 `` essential health benefits , '' including maternity care , emergency room trips and prescription drugs . The changes were offered in an attempt to attract support from the Freedom Caucus . But many of those caucus members remained unsatisfied , and the changes did not sit well with moderate Republicans .
Ryan had originally planned a vote for Thursday but put it off to provide more time to negotiate with the Freedom Caucus and the Tuesday Group , a moderate faction of House Republicans who feared the bill would make health care too costly for their their low-income and older constituents .
Trump , who negotiated directly with members of the two GOP factions , announced Thursday night that he was done talking and wanted the House to go ahead and vote .
Ryan went to the White House early Friday afternoon to inform Trump that he did not have enough GOP votes to pass the bill . He canceled the vote shortly after returning to the Capitol .
Contributing : Paul Singer , Nicole Gaudiano , Craig Gilbert , Maureen Groppe and Donovan Slack