The Trump administration is working on regulations that will require health care providers and insurers to tell patients how much a service will cost before they get it .
President Trump Donald John TrumpKamala Harris calls for Twitter to suspend Trump account over whistleblower attacks Clinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' John Dean : 'There is enough evidence ' to impeach Trump MORE , in an executive order issued Monday , directed the Department of Health and Human Services and other agencies to put out rules requiring hospitals disclose prices that reflect what patients and insurers “ actually pay ” for services .
The rules aim to bring more transparency to a health care system where patients usually don ’ t find out how much a procedure costs until they get the bill in the mail .
This will “ go down as one of the most significant steps in the long history of American health care reform , '' said Alex Azar , the secretary for the Department of Health and Human Services .
The rules will also require health care providers and insurers to tell patients about the out-of-pocket costs they ’ ll face before they receive health care services .
Azar said the rules would drive down prices because it would empower patients to shop around for the best costs .
The administration says that is difficult to do in the current health care system because hospitals and providers often do not provide quotes for services .
“ Everyday American patients are being taken advantage of by a system that hides critical information from them that they need to make decisions for them and their families , ” Azar said .
The agencies will also look at regulation to address “ surprise billing , ” which is when patients end up with a bill their insurance company won ’ t pay .
Trump has sought to make health care costs a key part of his 2020 reelection campaign .
But most of his policies have been limited in scope and are being challenged in court .
`` We 're taking power away from bureaucrats , we 're taking it away from insurance companies and away from special interests , '' Trump said Monday at an executive order signing .
`` We 're giving that power back to patients , and we 're giving Americans the right to know . ''
The administration is also working on proposals that they say will help lower prescription drug costs .