On Wednesday , nearly four years after launching his first unlikely presidential campaign , Senator Bernie Sanders unveiled a new version of one of his signature proposals : Medicare for All . The bill , which has 14 co-sponsors , outlines a universal , government-run healthcare program that would cover hospital care and preventative services , as well as dental and vision services . It would end employer-provided insurance plans , but the Veterans Health Administration and the Indian Health Services would continue to exist as stand-alone , government-run systems , according to Vox . Americans could still choose their own physicians .
Overall , the plan differs little from Sanders ’ s previous M4A legislation , with one notable exception : It adds a long-term care benefit , which would cover at-home care for people with disabilities . In this respect , it resembles the House version of the M4A introduced by Representative Pramila Jayapal in February .
The overlap illustrates a recurring concern about Sanders ’ s second presidential bid : that he ’ ll be a victim of his own success . Though Medicare for All did not originate with Sanders , the senator took it mainstream during his 2016 presidential campaign , and he owes his national profile in part to its popularity . This time , however , Medicare for All isn ’ t a fringe idea , and Sanders isn ’ t a fringe candidate , but a frontrunner . His policy positions — including Medicare for All — gained Democratic supporters over the last few years , and they ’ ve proven to be unexpectedly durable . Now several Democratic 2020 candidates are running on Medicare for All . In fact , four of them — Senators Cory Booker , Kirsten Gillibrand , Kamala Harris , and Elizabeth Warren — co-sponsored Wednesday ’ s bill . In theory , that could make it difficult for Sanders to distinguish himself from other leading candidates .
Since Sanders has already set the tone of the Democratic primary , on health-care policy , at least , the question now is whether he can set the pace — whether his more immediate vision of change will win out over incrementalist alternatives . Democrats who say they support Medicare for All in principle often favor less generous versions of it in practice ; as CNN notes , the candidates who co-sponsored the legislation have all signaled their willingness to consider compromise options . Booker , in a radio interview on Wednesday , described Medicare for All as an “ ideal ” and said that , while he thinks that the “ best way ” to ensure public access to affordable health care would be to design a Medicare for All system , “ anybody who says those words ‘ Medicare for All ’ who ’ s running for president , the next thing out of their mouth should be talking to people about , in a split Congress , what are you going to do in your first year to make healthcare more accessible and affordable ? ”
Cory Booker is among the 2020'ers signing on to Bernie 's MFA bill — but he 's framing it as more of an ideal than an immediate goal ( a la Green New Deal ) . From a radio interview this morning : pic.twitter.com/CUPWEuBxNW — Rebecca Buck ( @ RebeccaBuck ) April 10 , 2019
Sanders does have some advantages over Booker and other candidates who are open to more incremental health care reform . First , his public image is so linked to M4A that voters may be inclined to trust his approach over others ’ policy proposals . Second , the problems with maintaining America ’ s privatized system are vividly , and often painfully , apparent . Americans are rationing insulin because of the expense . Even having a healthy childbirth can be a luxury . As Axios reported , the U.S. is the most expensive nation in the world in which to give birth ; the cost is much lower in nations with a version of single-payer healthcare in place . In such dramatically unequal circumstances , voters may see the urgency of Sanders ’ s healthcare vision as a necessity , not merely an ideal .