The next time Sen. Bernie Sanders or his progressive Senate allies tout their proposal for total federal control of health care , just remember the case of Alfie Evans .
Consider the basic facts . The National Health Service , Britain ’ s “ single payer ” health care system , provides universal government coverage for British citizens . Alfie Evans , a seriously ill 23-month-old toddler , is a beneficiary of the National Health Service , and , as of this writing , a “ patient ” of Alder Hey Children ’ s Hospital in Liverpool , England .
Hospital physicians have determined that Alfie is in a “ semivegetative state. ” Remarkably , however , hospital personnel have been unable to give Tom Evans and Kate James , Alfie ’ s parents , a diagnosis of exactly what ’ s wrong with their child .
The parents wanted to move little Alfie to other hospitals , in hopes that he would have a chance of getting better care . British officials denied the parents ’ requests .
Hospital officials determined that Alfie ’ s case was hopeless , and decided to remove his ventilator and let the child die . Tom and Kate , hopelessly guilty of hope , wanted to provide oxygen for their son on their own if the hospital would not do so . Hospital officials denied the parents the right to provide their own oxygen for their child .
British authorities determined that Alfie must remain in the hospital , and hospital officials determined to end medical treatment , remove the ventilator , and let the child die . In the meantime , Tom and Kate went to the British courts for relief , as well as the European Court of Human Rights . These panels denied the parents ’ petitions .
Tom and Kate wanted to fly Alfie to Rome , Italy , where they could get a second medical opinion and try alternative treatments from Italian doctors that Alder Hey Children ’ s Hospital either would not or could not provide . A British court blocked that parental option , declaring that such a trip to the Rome would be “ wrong and pointless . ”
Finally , on appeal , the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom on April 20 issued its four-page decision , concluding : “ The hospital must be free to do what has been determined to be in Alfie ’ s best interests . That is the law in this country . ”
With the court ’ s ruling , hospital officials withdrew life support April 23 , and expected the child to die quickly . After all , the British courts had formally and decisively ruled that the child ’ s condition was hopeless , and that he could not live without a ventilator .
Their problem : Alfie did not die . The boy started breathing on his own , and , as of this writing , is still breathing on his own .
That same day , Italy intervened . The Italian government granted Italian citizenship to Alfie Evans , and agreed to fly the child to Rome for treatment at Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital . There would be no cost to the National Health Service or the British taxpayer . As of this writing , British authorities have refused these charitable overtures .
In correspondence with this writer , Joseph Morris , a former assistant attorney general of the United States and a law partner in a firm with offices in Britain and America , says the U.K. Supreme Court ’ s decision is itself beyond stunning :
The court holds that the preferences of the bureaucracy count for more than the judgments of Alfie ’ s parents . The court does not explain why this must be . The court ’ s opinion leads ineluctably to the conclusion that the views of the bureaucracy count for more than the views of a family in determining what is in the best interests of a child . …This is a dark hour for British justice . Parliament and the British judiciary stand indicted by their own actions and inactions of cruelty , intellectual dishonesty , and the high crime of hostility to life and liberty .
Morris is correct . British hospital officials may indeed be right in assessing Alfie ’ s condition as terminal , but British government officials are wrong in denying Alfie ’ s parents the right to try alternative medical treatment .
The sordid Alfie Evans saga holds larger lessons for all of us . If you give government officials control over your health care , you give them control over your life . If you reduce medical judgments to political or bureaucratic decisions , you can expect arrogant and cruel , often heartless and incompetent , decisions .
Finally , if you assume that the laws of the state are superior to the laws of God , then , for all practical purposes , your God is the state . If there is no higher law over the power of the state–natural law , as Cicero and Aquinas , Locke and Jefferson would describe it–then , logically , state power is absolute . Welcome to tyranny .