IOWA CITY , Iowa – Radiology technologist Jeff Dettbarn said he knew something was wrong at the Department of Veterans Affairs hospital in Iowa City , Iowa , when a patient arrived in February 2017 for a CT scan , but the doctor ’ s order for it had been canceled .
“ To have a patient show up for a scan and not have an order – you ’ re like , ‘ What the heck is going on ? ’ ” he told ███ in an interview .
Dettbarn started collecting cancellation notices for diagnostic procedures such as CT scans , MRIs and ultrasounds .
“ I knew something was not right , ” he said . “ Because none of them were canceled by a physician . ”
Cancellations of more than 250,000 radiology orders at VA hospitals across the country since 2016 have raised questions about whether – in a rush to clear out outdated and duplicate diagnostic orders – some facilities failed to follow correct procedures . At issue is a concern over whether some medically necessary orders for CT scans and other imaging tests were canceled improperly .
The VA inspector general is auditing mass cancellations at eight VA medical centers “ to determine whether VA processed radiology requests in a timely manner and appropriately managed canceled requests , ” VA Inspector General Michael Missal said .
Those hospitals are in Tampa and Bay Pines , Florida ; Salisbury , North Carolina ; Cleveland ; Dallas ; Denver ; Las Vegas ; and Los Angeles .
After receiving inquiries from ███ , a ninth was added – Iowa City .
In Iowa City , Dettbarn alerted the hospital ’ s compliance officer about his concerns . He is now facing disciplinary proceedings and contends they are an effort to retaliate against him .
The VA declined to comment on disciplinary proceedings without Dettbarn ’ s written consent to discuss personnel matters , which he did not provide .
This much is clear : in sworn testimony in the disciplinary proceedings against Dettbarn , Iowa City administrative staffer Lisa Bickford saidshe and other employees were told by the hospital ’ s chief radiologist that they needed to “ clean ” up a backlog of incomplete diagnostic orders , some dating back years .
The staff responded by “ annihilating ” thousands of orders in a matter of weeks , Bickford said .
Bryan Clark , a spokesman for the Iowa City hospital , acknowledged the facility failed to follow national VA guidelines for diagnostic order cancellations but said that happened in only a “ small number of instances ” and “ anything closed improperly was reviewed ” and actions were taken to try to ensure veterans received any needed exams . He said the process was intended to “ ensure the quality and safety of the care delivered to veteran patients . ”
The VA said many of the orders were outdated or duplicated . The agency said it welcomes the oversight and is working with the inspector general to improve cancellation guidelines . VA officials said efforts to close the loop on test orders with physicians and veterans surpass private-sector practices .
Laurence Meyer , the chief doctor overseeing specialty care for the national VA , told ███ he didn ’ t want to comment on how individual VA hospitals handled cancellations , but he acknowledged “ we ’ ve received word that a few places haven ’ t been following the directive as intended . ”
“ We ’ ve sent out teams and have reviewed and are aggressively working to fix that , ” he said .
The VA ’ s guidelines on order cancellations have undergone revisions in the past few years .
In 2016 , hospitals were told to try contacting patients multiple times before cancellations . Last year , the rules required review by a radiologist or the ordering provider before canceling . If the tests were still needed , patients should be contacted to schedule them . Since last year , hospitals have been required to establish a fail-safe `` triage '' process , such as written verification of review by providers .
Concerns about diagnostic test order cancellations have also been raised at the VA hospital in Tampa . Employees estimated they canceled thousands of radiology orders without checking first with doctors or patients , according to depositions in a discrimination lawsuit brought by four ultrasound technicians .
Those technicians told ███ they worry veterans may have gone months , if not a year or longer , before they or their doctors realized tests weren ’ t performed – if they realized at all . Technologist Erin Tonkyro noted that risk factors for many veterans are higher than for other patients .
“ Cancer grows very quickly , and our patients are not like those patients on the outside – it doesn ’ t mean that cancer doesn ’ t happen in private practice . But our veterans have been exposed to such a large amount of toxic environments like Agent Orange ; now we ’ re talking about the burn pits that have happened overseas , ” Tonkyro said .
At the Tampa facility , radiology managers began tackling outstanding orders in fall 2016 .
As many as 10 people were tasked with the job , one administrative staffer testified in a deposition in the technicians ’ lawsuit . Multiple employees testified they canceled orders by date and did not consult any doctors before doing so , nor was there patient contact .
They disabled office printers because of the volume of cancellations – one employee estimated they canceled thousands of radiology orders , according to testimony .
“ That ’ s when we really started getting worried , ” said Tonkyro , who attended the depositions with her co-plaintiffs , ultrasound technologists Yenny Hernandez , Kara Mitchell-Davis and Dana Strauser . “ We knew it was bad , but we had no idea the magnitude of how bad it was . ”
Strauser told ███ that administrators went beyond past orders and canceled future ones . Those could have been follow-up scans for veterans who might have been at risk of developing medical conditions , such as cancer recurrence .
“ Doctors will put an order in for six months in advance and sometimes even a year in advance , and we were getting cancellations of those future orders , ” she said .
In a statement issued by VA spokesman Curt Cashour , the VA declined to comment on what happened in Tampa , citing the litigation . “ However , we are confident the James A. Haley Veterans ’ Hospital has processes and procedures in place to provide the best care possible for our patients , ” the statement said .
The Tampa Bay Times first reported the technicians ’ concerns in July , and the hospital ’ s chief of staff , Colleen Jakey , wrote to providers the following month asking them to review canceled orders , according to a copy of the correspondence obtained by ███ .
“ We believe appropriate action was taken , ” Jakey wrote , adding that a review of a random sample of cancellations did not turn up any cases of harm to veterans . “ This is a second-level review of these orders to confirm that each of these patients received the appropriate care and/or follow up . ”
The technicians told ███ some doctors have since reordered canceled exams but won ’ t know whether veteran patients suffered any harm from the delays until they are performed and assessed .
VA hospitals came under increasing pressure to address outstanding diagnostic orders after a conference call that national officials convened with radiology managers across the country in January 2017 . More than 325,000 orders for scans of veteran patients had not been completed nationwide .
The VA ’ s top radiologist , Robert Sherrier , called it “ an important patient safety issue ” in a presentation for the call .
“ Ordered studies are not being performed on veterans , and providers may not be aware that the ordered study has not been completed , ” he said .
In a dozen states , there were VA medical centers with more than 5,000 outstanding orders , his presentation said . The numbers reached 29,000 in Columbia , S.C. ; 21,000 in Cleveland ; and 12,000 in Washington .
Some dated back to the 1980s , but others were only months old . VA officials said that in some cases , staff may not have been able to contact veterans to schedule exams . In other cases , veterans may not have shown up , possibly because their ailments had gone away . Some orders may have been duplicates ordered by two different doctors .
Others may have been tests that were still needed – to monitor tumors or follow up on emergency room visits , for example .
A panel of medical and ethics specialists conducted thousands of chart reviews , Meyer said , and determined orders for exams due to be performed before June 2015 could be canceled outright without jeopardizing veteran health .
Orders due after that date required further steps to ensure patient safety .
The national call to action triggered a dramatic reduction in pending exam orders overdue by two months or longer . As of last month , the VA said , there were 31,000 nationwide .
At the Iowa City VA hospital , Bickford said the chief of radiology – who also was the top radiology official in the Midwest for the VA – told her after the conference call in January 2017 that the facility had more outstanding orders than any other VA in the region .
“ He came to ( us ) and said , ‘ We ’ ve got to get this cleaned up now . I mean , we look terrible , ’ ” Bickford said . So she and other staff “ went through and started annihilating orders , ” she testified in the disciplinary proceeding against Dettbarn .
Any radiology orders more than 60 days past due were considered “ invalid ” and “ expired , ” Bickford testified . That is at odds with VA guidelines at the time requiring doctor reviews .
Cancellation records reviewed by ███ show that in some instances , she and other staff canceled future orders .
In one case , a nurse practitioner ordered an ultrasound for September 2017 as a six-month follow-up for a veteran with a history of kidney stones . An X-ray technician canceled it in June 2017 , calling it an “ expired ” order .
That same month , records indicate , Bickford canceled an order for a follow-up CT scan to monitor a veteran ’ s lung nodules . The test wasn ’ t due to be performed until September 2017 . Also in June , she canceled a CT to monitor fluid in a patient ’ s lung not due until November 2017 . Records show Bickford selected “ patient failed to contact clinic ” in both cases . None of the records reviewed by ███ contained personal information identifying patients .
In the disciplinary case against Dettbarn , his supervisors alleged he was “ disruptive ” and didn ’ t send one patient ’ s images to be interpreted – accusations he denied . The investigation was initiated soon after he reported his concerns about the order cancellations .
The Office of Special Counsel , a federal agency tasked with protecting whistle-blowers , is investigating , according to a letter from the office .
Bickford declined to comment and referred questions to the Iowa City VA . In her sworn testimony , she blamed scheduling clerks for not indicating on orders that exams were scheduled . That led employees to assume there was a “ dead order ” even though a patient had a future appointment , she said , but she estimated that occurred only “ maybe a half a dozen times. ” When patients arrived for appointments , the errors were discovered , new orders were created and the exams went ahead , she said .
The chief of radiology , Stanley Parker , did not respond to a message seeking comment at a number listed in public records . In his deposition in the case , he testified that he believed physician-review would have been done before canceling .
Clark , the hospital spokesman , said Bickford 's testimony about “ annihilating ” orders was not in context and referred to the “ success of the process to right size the number ” of outstanding radiology orders at the hospital .
Clark said he doesn ’ t know how many orders were canceled at the facility because officials didn ’ t track it , but he said more than 4,000 were canceled in January and February 2017 in the southern part of the Midwest region .
Clark said “ most ” canceled orders were from before 2015 , though he didn ’ t know how many . He said “ some ” exam orders were “ canceled without following proper policies or procedures . ”
In those instances , Clark said , “ appropriate personnel actions were taken to correct the behavior , and staff reviewed the cancellations to ensure every order that required action was appropriately reviewed by a radiology provider . ”
Dettbarn has been detailed to a job collating VA records since July 2017 . He said that whatever happens to him , he wants the public to know about what he called a “ horrible shortcut ” administrators took to improve the numbers . Dettbarn said Iowa City officials should do a clinical review like the Tampa VA to ensure veterans weren ’ t harmed .
“ It ’ s so far beyond wrong what was done , ” he said . “ This is someone ’ s health care , this is their body , their life you ’ re screwing with , and people are playing doctor that aren ’ t physicians . ”