The bill that prevented the nation from plunging over the fiscal cliff did more than just stop income tax increases and delay across-the-board spending cuts . It also included several provisions that tweaked Medicare and brought bigger changes to other health care programs .
The health care change that got the most attention saved doctors who treat Medicare patients from a cut in their pay . A really , really big cut , says David Bronson , president of the American College of Physicians and an internist in Cleveland .
`` We know that this would really devastate access to seniors , to just cut payment rates by almost 27 percent , '' says Bronson .
A pay cut that big would almost certainly drive doctors to stop taking new Medicare patients and perhaps even to drop existing ones . But the language in the bill was n't exactly what doctors were hoping for . It 's just another one-year delay in what 's become a familiar series since what just about everyone agrees is a flawed payment formula dating back to 2002 .
`` We 're happy that the cuts are n't going into place , but we 're hopeful that somehow this year a longer solution to get a stable payment system for physicians will get done , '' Bronson says .
Of course that 's been the plan every year since 2003 , when Congress first started putting off the cuts . It has n't happened yet .
Hospitals , meanwhile , are n't happy because this so-called doc fix was paid for , in part , by cutting $ 15 billion in Medicare and Medicaid payments to them over the next 10 years .
In the shorter term , Bronson says doctors are worried about what might happen when the across-the-board cuts known as the sequester are back on the table in just eight more weeks .
`` We 're particularly concerned about graduate medical education , '' he says . That 's the program in which the federal government helps pay for the training of young doctors , nurses and other medical professionals . `` That 's listed as a potential place where cuts could be made , and GME is vital to the medical workforce in this country . And we need to be expanding it , not reducing it , '' Bronson says .
But a health care program almost no one was watching was eliminated as part of the fiscal cliff deal . It was called the CLASS Act , and it was originally part of the 2010 health law . Added to the bill by Democratic Sen. Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts just before his death , the CLASS program was intended to provide publicly administered , long-term-care insurance at a modest cost .
`` Long-term care , in the broadest sense of it , is responsible for people , including families , the 355 days [ a year ] they 're not in the hospital and the 22 hours a day they 're not in the doctor 's office , '' says Larry Minnix , president of Leading Age , a group of more than 6,000 nonprofit providers of services to seniors and people with disabilities . `` There was no product available for those people and we thought it was time that that gap be filled , '' he says .
Republicans , however , saw the CLASS Act as a new and potentially unlimited government program that could n't possibly pay for itself .
`` We went from something that most every family is going to need but nobody wanted to talk about , into the most controversial part of it , '' said Minnix .
So in October 2011 , with the entire health law under legal attack , Obama officials put the CLASS Act into what Minnix refers to as an `` administration-induced coma . ''
`` We understand why they did it . It became too controversial at a controversial time , '' Minnix says .
But the administration had successfully fended off efforts to repeal the program , until now . At the insistence of Democratic Sen. Jay Rockefeller of West Virginia , CLASS was replaced by a new bipartisan commission charged with coming up with plans to help Americans pay for long-term care . It 's still essentially back to square one for the program .
Medicare has been a major sticking point in all the recent budget battles . And it 's likely to come up again in upcoming fights over the delayed budget cuts , raising the debt ceiling , and when last year 's temporary spending bills expire , all before the end of March .
`` We 're going to have three more cliff issues over the next three months , '' says health policy analyst Bob Laszewski . `` But we do n't even have a Medicare entitlement fix on the table , from either side . ''
Which means the 113th Congress is almost certain to get off to a rocky start .