As its Christmas gift to America , President Donald Trump ’ s reelection campaign created a “ Snowflake Victory ” website that provides honest God-fearing Americans with the arguments they need to demolish any young leftist relatives they may encounter over the holidays .
The site is a series of video clips with accompanying text coaching you through various pro-Trump talking points about the strength of the American economy , the need for a wall , and how there was “ no quid pro quo ” with the Ukrainian government . As is typical for Trump ’ s official communications , it relies pretty heavily on the strategy of saying things that aren ’ t true .
We know that at Christmas and holiday time , there ’ s always that liberal snowflake relative who starts an argument and then runs and hides .
Be like @ realDonaldTrump and keep winning ! https : //t.co/ReqvRPQquB — Brad Parscale - Text TRUMP to 88022 ( @ parscale ) December 24 , 2019
The environment section , for example , says “ we have the cleanest air on record. ” That would be great news if it were true , since recent studies indicate that air pollution is much more harmful than previously believed . The truth , however , is that people in the US are currently living through an unprecedented deterioration of air quality . That ’ s only partially the fault of Trump ’ s deregulatory initiatives , but his team has a lot more deregulatory initiatives in the pipeline that will make things even worse .
The Snowflake Victory document does convey one critically important truth — Trump really does not want to talk about his record on health care . On most topics at hand , Trump ’ s team has something — whether true or not — to say in favor of the Trump administration ’ s policy initiatives . But on health care , the argument is entirely negative — Democrats are bad ; Medicare-for-all is bad .
And that makes sense , because when it comes to health care , Trump can ’ t really tout his priorities . Over the past three years , he has pursued policies that would reduce the number of people who have health insurance and the quality of the insurance enjoyed by the insured .
The “ Snowflake Victory ” site has a pretty simple talking point when it comes to touting President Trump ’ s health care record : Democrats are bad .
“ Democrats like to squawk a lot about President Trump , Republicans , and healthcare , but the truth is , the 2020 Democrats are the ones who want to strip you of your private , employer-provided health insurance ! ” goes one talking point . The site talks about how Medicare-for-all requires tax increases , and argues that public option alternatives “ are designed to kill employer-provided health plans too. ” It also serves up for the reader what it considers a killer line : “ Ask your relative if they like going to the DMV ? Now tell them to imagine the government controlling their healthcare system because that ’ s exactly what it would be like . ”
Personally , it has not been my experience that filing reimbursement paperwork with Cigna is a notably superior customer service experience to what ’ s provided at the Department of Motor Vehicles . And I suppose the snowflakes might turn this around and ask their older MAGA relatives if they feel Medicare is really so awful .
But the key thing is this discussion would leave you with no idea that Trump is actually doing stuff on health insurance — stuff his reelection campaign can ’ t really defend .
To review the record here , the Trump administration spent months pushing a variety of Affordable Care Act repeal plans , each of which would have cost tens of millions of people their health insurance . None of those efforts succeeded , but it wasn ’ t for lack of trying .
He has followed that up by pushing a variety of Medicaid waiver schemes to allow GOP-held states to restrict low-income families ’ access to health care . His administration is particularly enthusiastic about work requirements that reduce coverage while doing nothing to encourage work . Work requirements in several states were put on hold by federal courts , but Trump is also remaking the federal judiciary and confirming sympathetic judges at a record pace . Consequently , he ’ s likely to ultimately prevail in this effort to reduce coverage .
Speaking of the courts , the Trump administration is also vigorously pursuing a lawsuit that , if successful , would toss out the entire Affordable Care Act .
That would entail a much more dramatic reduction in Medicaid coverage , plus the loss of subsidies for millions of Americans who buy coverage on the exchanges , plus the removal of critical regulatory protections for everyone who gets job-based insurance . GOP appointees on the Fifth Circuit Court seemed poised to give Trump what he wanted on this , then got cold feet just before Christmas . But they didn ’ t rule in favor of upholding the Affordable Care Act . Instead , they came up with some procedural delays that may have been designed to not do anything politically explosive until after the election .
The result of all this is that the uninsured rate in America is actually rising even though the labor market is getting stronger — a clear sign that health care remains an important policy area that won ’ t be fixed just by good generic economic conditions . And it ’ s a policy area where Trump is pursuing priorities — less insurance — that his own team has no defense for .