President Obama 's goal is to make no more concessions to the House GOP on the law . W.H . determined on Obamacare
That ’ s the strategy President Barack Obama and Capitol Hill Democrats are pursuing as the nation faces a government shutdown , a historic default on its debt and the final phase of Obamacare .
Obama ’ s domestic agenda — headed up by infrastructure spending , gun control and immigration reform — has long since stalled . Now , with the basic functions of government on the line again , he ’ s defining his goal as not giving any more ground to House Republicans — no budget cuts and no concessions on the Affordable Care Act or the debt limit .
Obamacare , the crown jewel of the president ’ s legislative legacy , is truly non-negotiable for the administration , according to Democrats privy to conversations behind closed doors at the White House and on Capitol Hill .
Rob Nabors , Obama ’ s deputy chief of staff for policy , told that to House Democratic leaders during a closed-door session on Thursday , according to a Democratic source on Capitol Hill .
“ They ’ re willing to negotiate , but not on ACA , ” the source said of Nabors ’ s message . The bigger problem , the source said , is that “ Republicans can ’ t get their s—t together to sit down and talk . ”
With the exception of a Wednesday meeting on the debt limit with Treasury Secretary Jack Lew , Boehner and his aides haven ’ t talked fiscal matters with the White House recently , according to Boehner spokesman Brendan Buck . Nabors told House Democrats that there have been no back channel conversations with the speaker .
The White House position is a defensive posture struck as much out of necessity as from choice , and one that remains unchanged after Washington lost more than two weeks on domestic matters while it was fixated on the Syria crisis . The idea is to prevent further damage to party priorities . Administration officials also believe that Republicans will back down to avoid economic catastrophe and the ensuing political fallout .
“ The combination of those two incentives will compel them to come up with a solution , ” White House press secretary Jay Carney said Thursday . “ We have drawn the lines we have drawn , and we ’ ll see what they produce . ”
But Democrats in Congress say they aren ’ t so sure that the White House is really ready to back up its rhetoric , particularly on a short-term spending bill known as a continuing resolution that would lock in lower spending levels than House Democrats want and take political pressure off of House Republican leaders . While the White House won ’ t give ground on Obamacare with regard to the CR , House Democratic leaders are far more inclined to let the government shut down over the spending levels or length of the extension than their White House counterparts .
“ Our leadership thinks the time has come to draw a line in the sand , not do a short-term extension , ” said a senior Democratic aide . “ They ’ re ready for a flash and a pop . ”
Recalling past budget battles , the aide said the administration ’ s hard line on the CR and the debt limit could move .
“ I don ’ t know that I trust them , because they ’ ve said that before and it ’ s changed , ” the aide said .
Senate Democratic leaders echoed White House arguments in a Capitol Hill press conference on Thursday , and they feel confident that their solidarity will prevail over a fractured House Republican Conference that just had to pull a stopgap bill to keep the government funded into the fall because it wouldn ’ t gut Obamacare .
“ The biggest thing has been the uniformity in the refusal to negotiate on the debt ceiling , ” said Matt House , the communications director for Sen. Chuck Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) . “ We think at the last minute they ’ re going to be the ones that have to blink and come to us . ”
House Republicans are badly fractured over spending . They can ’ t agree among themselves on whether to keep spending on its current trajectory , cut it further than the caps agreed to in previous budget deals , or , as a handful of Republicans believe , raise it a little bit . More important at the moment , they are divided over whether to shut down the government in the name of starving Obamacare .