After weeks of lock-down secrecy , Senate Republicans have finally released their version of TrumpCare .
It 's called the Better Care Reconciliation Act ( BCRA ) , and it 's quite a sight to behold . Apparently realizing this is their one shot to kill ObamaCare and remake the whole health-care safety net , the Republicans seemed to have crammed every last ounce of cruelty and hypocrisy they could muster into the bill .
1 . It 's basically a plan to destroy Medicaid . That 's the government program that provides health insurance for low-income Americans . It covers more people than Medicare , most of its beneficiaries are children , the elderly , and the disabled , and it pays the bulk of Americans ' long-term care and nursing home costs .
ObamaCare massively expanded eligibility for the program , and the BCRA would phase that expansion out by 2024 .
But the BCRA would also massively cut the pre-ObamaCare Medicaid program as well . It would force states to spend less Medicaid dollars per person . ( Though there 's a carve-out for the least-populated states , where per person Medicaid costs are the highest . ) And it would give states the option of imposing work requirements on beneficiaries .
But most importantly , it would first cap the program 's growth rate to the inflation rate in medical prices , then change it to the inflation rate for the entire economy in 2025 . This is a gargantuan cut in the share of spending the federal government was expected to contribute in the future — far larger than the 25-percent cut envisioned by the House GOP .
Finally , the BCRA also drops the income eligibility threshold for premium subsidies to zero . That 's significant because , under ObamaCare , you did n't get the subsidies if you were poor enough , because Medicaid would step in . So in a sense , the BCRA is really a plan to slowly strangle Medicaid and replace it with subsidies to buy private coverage .
2 . Its subsidies for private insurance premiums are terrible . ObamaCare included subsidies to help people afford the premiums on the state-based insurance exchanges it created . And one of ObamaCare 's big problems is that these subsidies are too skimpy . The BCRA 's subsidies would be even skimpier .
Instead of phasing out at 400 percent of the federal poverty line , like they do under ObamaCare , the BCRA 's subsidies would phase out at 350 percent . More than that , though , it would rejigger the formula that calculates subsidies for everyone : Americans at all income levels from 0 to 400 percent of the federal poverty line would often be expected to pay a bigger share of their premiums out of pocket . Their subsidies would also be benchmarked to significantly less generous coverage plans than under ObamaCare , with deductibles that could skyrocket by as much as 60 percent . Americans will basically have to pay much more for worse health insurance .
This obviously contradicts all the promises that Republicans and President Trump have made on the issue . It 's also worth noting that Trump 's own base — older Americans in rural areas — will be the people hit hardest by these cuts .
3 . All this pays for massive tax cuts for the wealthy . You can see this in the Congressional Budget Office 's score of the House version of TrumpCare . The BCRA is similar enough — it keeps virtually all the House 's tax cuts , and its Medicaid cuts are deeper over the long run — that the CBO 's analysis generally applies to it , too . The House plan would cut Medicaid by $ 834 billion and premium subsidies by $ 276 billion over 10 years . Then it would cut taxes on employers , big medical businesses , and wealthy Americans by $ 874 billion over the same period , with a little change left over for deficit reduction . In broad strokes , that 's what the Senate version would do too ( its own CBO analysis wo n't be out till early next week ) .
But what 's really amusing is that the biggest cut in the BCRA is to a capital gains tax . It would only apply to people who earn more than $ 200,000 annually and it would be retroactive . So it ca n't even be justified as an incentive to boost economic growth .
In other words , the whole bill is basically a giant giveaway to the wealthy , paid for by cutting health care to the poor .
4 . It would hypocritically resurrect insurer `` bailouts . '' The Senate bill would create funds to help insurance companies provide coverage when the individual markets are unstable . It would allocate $ 50 billion between 2018 and 2021 to `` fund arrangements with health insurance issuers to address coverage and access disruption and respond to urgent health-care needs within states . '' It would allot another $ 62 billion in grants that states can apply for between 2019 and 2026 for similar purposes .
On the policy merits , this is actually a good idea . But it 's also utterly brazen hypocrisy on the Republicans ' part . ObamaCare created similar mechanisms for stabilizing insurers ' finances , but the GOP insisted on stripping them out in 2015 on the grounds that they were a `` bailout '' for the insurance industry . That made rising premiums worse — which Republicans have since used to justify the need to repeal and replace ObamaCare . It 's galling that they 'd try to sneak this `` bailout '' back into their own bill .
5 . It brazenly thumbs its nose at Senate rules . To pass the BCRA with a simple majority vote , as opposed to a filibuster-proof 60 votes , the GOP is relying on a procedural gambit called reconciliation . Bills passed by reconciliation have to limit themselves to tax and spending changes that meaningfully affect the budget .
Much of the BCRA meets this requirement . But it also includes waivers that would allow states to get out of any number of ObamaCare 's regulations : What benefits insurance plans must cover , the actuarial value of those plans , and even whether a state has to have an insurance exchange at all . All of which seems to clearly fall afoul of reconciliation 's rules .
So this is another example of the GOP 's unbelievable chutzpah . But it 's also arguably the biggest existential threat to the BCRA .
Ultimately , the Senate parliamentrian will have to rule on whether the waiver changes can be included . And they 'll be under immense pressure from Republicans to allow them . But the parliamentarian might not . And the waivers were crucial to passing TrumpCare through the House . Without them , it 's unclear if the House and Senate could agree on a final version , or even if the BCRA could make it through next week 's Senate vote . Either way , it would be very fitting if the audacity of the bill ultimately did it in .