Washington is full of ideas on how to fix the fully loaded SUV known as Obamacare . On Thursday , President Obama offered his fix . On Friday , members of the House – including 39 Democrats – approved theirs , and other lawmakers have their own ideas . But all these busy mechanics could end up doing more damage to Obamacare .
Well , start with the general aim of the various repairs . They differ in detail , but basically , they would allow – for varying times – millions of Americans whose health insurance is being canceled under Obamacare to keep their plans and their doctors if they like them . Just like Mr. Obama originally promised .
So far , at least 4.2 million Americans have been sent cancellation notices by their insurers , according to an Associated Press survey . The important thing to remember about this group is that it tends to be healthier than the uninsured , who will be most attracted to Obamacare . If you allow these healthier individuals to remain outside the Obamacare pool , you are spelling actuarial trouble . It ’ s like removing a piston from an engine and still expecting it to run smoothly .
No one is sure exactly how big this problem could become , but the fear is that the Obamacare exchanges “ will be attracting a disproportionate share of the higher-cost , sicker people , ” says Cori Uccello , senior health fellow at the American Academy of Actuaries . That translates into higher premiums and , potentially , an insurance system that can ’ t adequately support itself .
From insurers ’ point of view , it ’ s just too late to reverse course and implement the change . Some state insurance commissioners say that bringing back these canceled policies will actually violate new state laws that now forbid such “ substandard ” plans . Two biggies in this group are California and New York .
A reversal could just add to the confusion and lack of confidence already swirling around Obamacare . A crisis of confidence in the new health-care system could be debilitating . Take it from Larry Kocot , a visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution who helped roll out Medicare Part D , the prescription drug benefit , during the George W. Bush administration .
Back then , they called Part D ’ s stumbles “ glitches , ” but the rollout of Obamacare has “ surpassed glitches , ” he says . “ It ’ s very , very hard to address confusion . ”
So why make such repairs , when their downsides are so numerous ? For one , the blowback from those unhappy with the cancellations has reached the force of a “ Category 5 political hurricane , ” as Rep. Greg Walden ( R ) of Oregon put it at a Monitor breakfast Friday . Real people , kicked off plans they liked , are now facing higher premiums and deductibles – and they ’ re telling their members of Congress about it .
Obama ’ s approval rating , too , has sunk to 39 percent . On Thursday , he tried to shield Democrats in Congress , some of whom face tough races in the midterm elections of 2014 , by announcing an executive fix that leaves it up to insurers and states to allow people to return to their old health plans if they want to .
But the politics of Obamacare has become so damaging to Democratic lawmakers , who “ own ” Obamacare as much as the president does , that nearly 40 House Democrats peeled from their caucus to support Friday ’ s bill , backed by Rep. Fred Upton ( R ) of Michigan .
Most Democrats don ’ t like this bill , and Obama promises to veto it , because it allows new customers to sign on to canceled plans – enlarging the pool of people who could be attracted to the plans and worsening the outlook for Obamacare ’ s sustainability .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Instead , Democrats such as Sen. Mary Landrieu of Louisiana , who has been criticized at home for her support of Obamacare and who faces a tough race next year , are working on their own legislation .
Where all this is headed is tough to say . But the rollout is producing problems beyond a broken website . Fixing them is like pulling on a loose thread . Give it a tug , and things start to unravel .