As millions of people receive notices that their health insurance is being canceled , the White House said Tuesday that President Obama didn ’ t mislead the public when he repeatedly and emphatically promised that everyone could keep their plan under Obamacare .
Top aides to the president said that , although Mr. Obama never mentioned it specifically , his promise referred only to people who have had uninterrupted health insurance coverage dating back to before the law ’ s enactment in 2010 .
But even Obama allies such as House Minority Whip Steny H. Hoyer , Maryland Democrat , acknowledged that the president ’ s promises were overly broad . Mr. Hoyer said Mr. Obama ’ s message “ was not precise enough . ”
“ Clearly , it should have been caveated with , ‘ Assuming you have a policy that , in fact , does do what the bill is designed to do , ’ ” Mr. Hoyer said .
Republican lawmakers , and some of the nearly 7 million consumers who could receive cancellation notices , say Mr. Obama has been lying to them .
“ If the president knew that these [ cancellation ] letters were coming and still indicated that you could keep your health care plan if you liked it , now , that raises some serious questions about the sales job of Obamacare , ” said House Majority Leader Eric Cantor , Virginia Republican .
SEE ALSO : White House : ‘ You can keep your plan ’ promise was not misleading
On social media , the reaction was more harsh . In a comment that was typical of the mounting criticism , a woman on Twitter with the handle of @ KatLadyNE called the administration “ pathetic liars . ”
White House press secretary Jay Carney said Mr. Obama “ was clear about a basic fact . ”
“ If you had a plan before the Affordable Care Act that you liked on the individual market , and your insurance company provided you the same plan this whole time , you can keep it . ”
But that was not what millions of Americans heard the president pledging over the past five years . In August 2009 , for example , Mr. Obama decried what he called “ outrageous myths circulating on the Internet , on cable TV , and repeated at some town halls across this country ” about the health care legislation .
“ As I ’ ve said from the beginning , under the reform we seek , if you like your doctor , you can keep your doctor , ” Mr. Obama said . “ If you like your private health insurance plan , you can keep your plan . Period . ”
In a June 2009 speech to the American Medical Association , Mr. Obama declared emphatically : “ No matter how we reform health care , we will keep this promise to the American people : If you like your doctor , you will be able to keep your doctor , period . If you like your health care plan , you ’ ll be able to keep your health care plan , period . No one will take it away , no matter what . ”
Even as late as March , Mr. Obama spoke in the present tense when he told Americans , “ If you like the plan that you have , you can keep it , period . ”
Critics noted that the Affordable Care Act is forcing insurers to drop many of their plans that don ’ t meet the law ’ s 10 minimum standards , including maternity care , emergency visits and mental health treatment .
As a result , insurance companies across the country have sent cancellation notices to more than 2 million people who had purchased policies on the individual market . In New Jersey , there are 800,000 ; in Florida , 300,000 ; in California , 279,000 ; and in Michigan , 140,000 .
One industry analyst has estimated that as many as 7 million people will have their policies canceled , requiring them to shop for plans under Obamacare that are often more expensive , especially if the consumer doesn ’ t qualify for a taxpayer-funded subsidy .
An insurance industry specialist , Larry Levitt of the Kaiser Family Foundation , said insurance companies have no choice but to take these actions . “ It is administratively easier to cancel than change plans , ” he said on his Twitter account .
As the furor grew Tuesday over canceled policies , the White House and its Democratic allies increasingly were casting blame on the insurance industry instead of the law .
Democrats raised a trial balloon for this offensive late Monday night from two key presidential aides .
Valerie Jarrett , one of President Obama ’ s most trusted advisers , wrote on her Twitter account : “ Nothing in # Obamacare forces people out of their health plans . No change is required unless insurance companies change existing plans. ” Deputy press secretary Eric Schultz published a near-identical tweet : “ Don ’ t be fooled . Nothing in the ACA forces people out of their plans . No change is required unless ins companies change their existing plan ”
The comments prompted a furious reaction , including from one conservative blogger who likened Ms. Jarrett ’ s explanation to saying “ there ’ s nothing about land mines that forces explosions . ”
The Democratic pushback coincided with a flurry of Capitol Hill activity on the botched Obamacare rollout .
• At a House Ways and Means Committee hearing , the head of the agency overseeing the law apologized Tuesday to people who have tried to use the flawed federal website .
• The House investigative panel issued a subpoena against Quality Software Services Inc. demanding documents that will show whether the contractor hired to build the federal Obamacare website took precautions on data security .
The White House tried to emphasize Tuesday that 80 percent of Americans will keep their insurance coverage , and “ only ” 5 percent of consumers will be required to purchase policies by March 31 — about 14 million people . Mr. Carney characterized the current insurance market as “ the Wild West , ” saying it has been “ underregulated . ”
As a result , he said , unscrupulous insurance companies have been free to leave consumers unprotected in a health care crisis .
“ They could throw you off . They could jack up your premiums . They could change your coverage , ” Mr. Carney said , ironically citing the same complaints of people whose policies are being canceled as a result of Obamacare .
When a reporter confronted Mr. Carney with the fact that many consumers are being forced out of plans they like , the president ’ s spokesman replied , “ If you want to make that point , you can . ”