For nearly seven years , Republicans have been saying that they would repeal and replace Obamacare as soon as they had the power to do it . Now they have the White House and majorities in both houses of Congress , but appear not to have any viable strategy for making good on that promise .
The elusiveness of that strategy follows from the many constraints under which Republicans are operating . Here are six . One : A lot of people who voted for Republicans want to see the end of Obamacare , for both philosophical and practical reasons . Two : A lot of them — sometimes the same people — are nervous about losing their health coverage if it goes . Most people also like important elements of Obamacare , such as its ban on insurer discrimination against people with preexisting conditions and its requirement that adults under age 26 be allowed to get coverage through their parents ’ plans .
Three : Senate rules are generally thought to expose any legislation that modifies or abolishes Obamacare ’ s regulations to filibuster — which means that any 41 of the chamber ’ s 48 Democrats could block that legislation . Republicans can use the “ budget reconciliation ” rules to pass legislation with 51 votes in the Senate , but only , they think , if that legislation exclusively concerns taxes and spending rather than regulations . Four : The Democrats are nearly uniform in their opposition to doing anything to Obamacare other than tweaking or spending more money on it .
Five : Republicans do not all agree on what “ replacement ” should look like . The most worked-out Republican plans would make it possible for nearly everyone to buy catastrophic-insurance policies but vastly reduce the federal role in regulating health insurance . Some Republicans , though , would prefer to return government policy to what it was before Obamacare , or to pursue a different free-market policy , even if those alternatives led to a loss of coverage for 10 to 20 million Americans .
Six : Obamacare ’ s provisions are interrelated in a way that makes piecemeal changes perilous . Because the law requires insurers to sell the same policies at the same prices to the sick and the healthy alike — one of its popular elements — it creates an incentive for healthy people to forgo insurance . They can wait until they are sick to buy it . But health-insurance markets can not work if only sick people buy coverage . That ’ s why Obamacare also includes its unpopular provision fining people for not buying insurance : to prod healthy people to get covered . Take away the fines but not the regulation , and insurance markets could unravel .
In the weeks following the election , when they were surprised that their party had won unified control of the government and would have to enact health-care legislation , Republican congressional leaders came up with a strategy that attempted to take account of the first five conditions . That strategy came to be known as “ repeal and delay. ” Early in 2017 , Republicans would pass a bill under the reconciliation rules to repeal the tax and spending provisions of Obamacare but would provide that the repeal take full effect a few years from now . In the interim , they would pass legislation replacing Obamacare .
If Republicans stick together , they can execute the first part of this strategy without any Democratic votes and without reaching an agreement among themselves on a replacement . They could then tell conservatives that Obamacare is dead , or at least that it has been given a death sentence , and tell voters in general that a replacement is coming . Some Republicans even say that Democrats will work with them on the second bill ( replacement ) once the first one ( partial repeal ) has been enacted .
Many Republicans are , however , uneasy about this strategy . Republicans who want a replacement that ensures that most of Obamacare ’ s beneficiaries have access to insurance fear that some of their Republican colleagues will call it a day once they have crippled Obamacare . They think Democrats will be more eager to blame them for taking away people ’ s coverage than to work with them on restoring it — and think that Democrats will be successful in blaming them , since they will in fact have passed a law taking it away .
One serious drawback of the strategy is that it does not account for the interrelatedness of Obamacare ’ s provisions ( our sixth fact above ) . The partial-repeal bill would abolish the fine for people who go without insurance , and might even do that effective immediately . But it would leave in place Obamacare ’ s protection for people with preexisting conditions , both because it is popular and because it is a regulation that they think can not be touched under reconciliation rules .
Obamacare ’ s exchanges have already been attracting a relatively sick segment of the population : Many healthy people are paying the fine instead of buying insurance . That ’ s why many insurers have been booking losses and leaving the exchanges . If the fines are abolished , even more healthy people will decide to forgo health insurance until they get sick . The result could be higher premiums , more insurers dropping out , and even fewer customers . Ending the subsidies for people buying insurance on the exchanges by a date certain , as the partial-repeal bill would do , would make insurers even more inclined to leave the exchanges .
People buying individual health policies outside the exchanges could be affected , too . Their premiums might also increase as healthy people decide they don ’ t need health insurance .
Democrats will probably try to score political points by assailing the Republicans for having wrecked Obamacare without replacing it .
If partial repeal has these effects , Democrats will probably try to score political points by assailing the Republicans for having wrecked Obamacare without replacing it , and to demand that Republicans restore the law ’ s repealed components rather than work with them on a replacement . The plan could amount to repealing in haste and repenting at leisure .
The strategy could not be better designed to maximize disruption in health markets . Yet public hostility to such disruption is the central fact in the politics of health care . It is the main reason the Clintons ’ health-care plan crashed and burned in the 1990s : Remember those ads saying it threatened everything viewers valued in their health care ? It is the reason that Barack Obama spent $ 44 million savaging John McCain for threatening to tax employer-provided health insurance in 2008 . It is the reason that one of President Obama ’ s main talking points in selling Obamacare was that it would let people keep their plans if they liked them . It is the reason that the cancellation of many plans as a result of Obamacare ’ s regulations became the biggest political problem his administration faced on health care since the law passed . And it is the reason Speaker of the House Paul Ryan keeps saying that Republicans will see to it that we make a “ stable transition ” from Obamacare to a better system .
A better Republican strategy would be designed around Ryan ’ s stated goal . It would begin with the understanding that Obamacare ’ s worst features are its overregulation of health insurance and its centralization of regulation in Washington , D.C . The way Obamacare regulates insurers ’ treatment of people with preexisting conditions , the benefits they have to offer , and the difference between what they can charge the young and the old have raised premiums and deductibles , resulted in insurance policies that are not attractive to the young and healthy , and so made the exchanges shaky at best in much of the country even with the help of the individual mandate .
Republicans already have a set of legislative ideas ( if not yet actual legislation ) that builds on that insight . The main Republican alternative to Obamacare — advanced in different forms by Senators Bill Cassidy , Orrin Hatch , Richard Burr , and Marco Rubio , by the House Republicans , and by Tom Price , Trump ’ s nominee to be secretary of health and human services — is to create a much less regulated market .
In the ideal form of this legislation , people who do not have coverage through their employers would get a tax credit that allowed them to purchase at least catastrophic coverage . They could choose to buy more-extensive coverage if they supplemented the credit out of their own pockets . Their coverage would need to satisfy only two conditions to qualify for the tax credit : It met their own state ’ s regulatory standards , and people on the insurance rolls would be able to renew their policies or buy comparable policies if they got sick .
That second requirement , common to many Republican plans , would offer real protection for people with preexisting conditions . Those already covered by Obamacare — that is , who enrolled in the expanded version of Medicaid or bought exchange policies — would be able to stay covered . The combined effect of the regulation and the tax credit would make their coverage affordable . But healthy people would not be able to game the system by waiting until they got sick to buy coverage ; the regulation would be an incentive for them to get covered while they ’ re well .
This alternative would face some criticism from both left and right . Some on the right would call it “ Obamacare lite , ” since it would involve the use of tax credits to help people buy health insurance . But a replacement of Obamacare along these lines would eliminate its federal definition of essential benefits , its age bands , its employer and individual mandate , its Medicare rationing board , and its federally subsidized exchanges . It would end the federal government ’ s chief regulatory role , which was Obamacare ’ s main innovation . And this replacement , unlike Obamacare , would be neutral with respect to whether people chose comprehensive or catastrophic coverage .
The result would be a market that was in important respects freer not only than what we have now but than what we had before Obamacare . Even before Obamacare , a range of public policies stunted the market for cheap , renewable individual insurance policies . A conservative Obamacare replacement would enable that market to grow . The purchase of health insurance would still be heavily subsidized , as it has been for decades . But federal subsidies would no longer come with as heavy a thumb on the scale for one form of insurance over another . Compared with the policies of the last several decades , federal policy would shift toward facilitating rather than seeking to shape the decisions of market participants .
On the left , the main criticism of this kind of Obamacare replacement would be that catastrophic coverage is inferior to comprehensive coverage . Whether it ’ s worth paying extra for more-extensive coverage , though , is a trade-off best left to individuals and families . Some evidence suggests that the main value of insurance is that it protects people from major financial setbacks if they get sick .
A legislative strategy designed to advance this kind of replacement would not defer action on Obamacare ’ s regulations . Nor would it abolish its tax credits in one bill only to create new ones later . Instead it would end funding for Obamacare but also establish the new , simpler tax credit , stipulating that people could use the credit to buy any policy that met the two conditions — approval from state regulators and renewability — that conservative replacement plans envision . Obamacare ’ s regulations could stay on the books , but they would be made irrelevant . Replacement and repeal would be accomplished in one step .
Getting Republicans to agree to this strategy in the requisite numbers , overcoming parliamentary hurdles , and answering Democratic attacks on it would be no small task . It would involve taking a first step that is more ambitious than repeal-and-delay would , and therefore it might take longer to accomplish . But it would reduce the likelihood of severe disruption to health-insurance markets and of a political debacle for Republicans . It would rip out Obamacare ’ s regulatory heart , which repeal-and-delay can not guarantee . And it would make good , at long last , on seven years ’ worth of promises to repeal the law and replace it with something better .