Our ongoing troubles with health care stem from an unwillingness to deal with certain facts . One of those facts is scarcity .
“ Scarcity ” is a term from economics , and it refers to the fact that there is never enough of anything to satisfy every possible desire — the universe holds only so much , and human desire has a way of outgrowing whatever we have . So we have to come up with a way of dividing up that which is scarce . We have tried many different ways of doing that — war , caste systems , central planning — though mostly we ’ ve relied on the fact that everybody wants lots of different things , which makes it possible to trade . But buying and selling stuff is not , to be sure , the only way to divide up that which is scarce .
Medical care is scarce : There are only so many doctors and hospital rooms ; the pill factories can make only so many pills , and there are real limitations on the raw materials used to make those pills ; heart stents don ’ t grow on trees , but , even if they did , they would be scarce , like apples and oranges and pears and avocados .
An example : A few years ago , a friend of mine was deathly sick with a chronic cardiac condition . He learned that a doctor in another country — on another continent — had developed an experimental treatment for his condition . The chances of its working were not very high , but it had worked on others . The problem was , there were something like three doctors in the world who did that procedure , and approximately one who had done it with a great deal of success . His insurance would not pay for it , and the public-health system in his country would not even think of paying for it . But my friend was vastly wealthy , so he called up that doctor , offered him what I assume was a very large sum of money , put him on an airplane , and rented out space in the finest private hospital money could buy . Unhappily , the procedure was not successful , and he died .
We can not offer the same level of care to everybody with the same condition . They number in the millions , and the doctors who can perform that procedure number about three . ( Or , at least they did ten years ago . ) Even if they worked 16-hour shifts , seven days a week — even if we pressed them into slavery — they could see only so many patients and perform so many procedures , and those would amount to a tiny fraction of the number of people who might benefit from their attention .
Because of scarcity , medical care eventually reaches the point where one of three things happens : Somebody puts out his hand and says “ Pay me , ” an officer of the government or an insurance company refuses to approve some treatment , or you die .
Because we are a largely cooperative species , we do not like that very much . It seems unfair and unkind . So we try to make an end run around scarcity with things such as health insurance and government medical plans , both of which are based on the same economic principle : Someone else pays . But scarcity does not care who is paying : Scarcity is scarcity . In the most monopolistic public-health systems ( e.g. , the ones in the United Kingdom and Canada ) , there is a lot of saying “ No , ” though it is what we might call a “ Japanese no ” — saying “ no ” without actually saying it . They put you on a waiting list and hope you die before they actually have to say “ No , ” or they simply expect you to accept that some services and treatments are categorically unavailable . There is a reason New York City ’ s hospitals are full of rich Canadians who can not afford the free health care at home .
But a polite , indirect “ No ” is still a “ No. ” No means no .
Insurance companies say “ No ” all the time , and we hate them for it . That is because of another fact that we refuse to deal with like mature , responsible adults : Insurance is not a medical product — it is a financial product . Most of us do not need to spend a great deal of money on health care during any given year for most of our lives . I myself pay for most of my medical expenses out-of-pocket , and , in any given year , they rarely add up to what my health-insurance premiums cost . But I do not have health insurance , and pay premiums for that health insurance , in order to have somebody else pay for my annual check-up or routine dental work . I have insurance because I might get hit by a bus or cancer or a heart attack , and , secondarily , because one day I will be old , if I am lucky , and old people have lots of medical expenses .
Scarcity exists because of the nature of the physical universe , not because insurance executives are big meanies .
Scarcity exists because of the nature of the physical universe , not because insurance executives are big meanies . ( It ’ s okay to hate insurance executives — everybody hates insurance executives . ) Insurance companies have to say “ No ” a great deal , whether they are run by nice people or by the sort of people who ordinarily run insurance companies . The Canadian government health-care system is in essence a big , generous insurance company owned by its customers and perfectly happy to run large losses indefinitely , and it still has to say “ No ” pretty often .
Putting mandates on insurance companies is not a cure for scarcity . Sometimes , it makes things worse . Insurance companies operate by making a very careful study of actuarial information , which allows them to make remarkably accurate predictions about the medical needs of large populations with known demographic characteristics . Nobody knows whether any given 60-year-old man will have a heart attack this year , but stack up 10 million of them , and the pointy-headed actuarial nerds can tell you with a high degree of accuracy how many of them will . But we want insurance to be something different : We want it to be the conqueror of scarcity . So we do things like mandate coverage of preexisting medical conditions , which is to say , we demand that they place bets against things that already have happened . The usual metaphor here is offering fire insurance after the house already has burned down , and that is apt . We are asking them to bet against the Patriots in the 2017 Super Bowl after the fact , in 2018 , in 2019 , 2020 , etc .
What might a health-care program that deals with reality look like ?
We could probably lower the cost of prescription drugs significantly by making the approval process less cumbrous and expensive , and maybe by tweaking a few intellectual-property procedures . We could do the same with medical devices and the like , though the so-called Affordable Care Act took the opposite approach , taxing those devices and making them scarcer . If we want more doctors , there are probably 1 million top-shelf physicians from around the world who would immigrate to the United States yesterday if we gave them the go-ahead . ( Yes , that probably would lower the incomes of native-born doctors ; we are going to be adults for the moment , and this is a question of trade-offs . ) We could reduce the regulatory burden on insurance companies in an effort to lure more of them into the market , whereas the ACA added to their burdens and drove many of them from the marketplace .
We could try to make ordinary , non-emergency medical care more of an ordinary product , one that people pay for the way they pay for food and housing and cars and World of Warcraft expansion packs .
We could try to make ordinary , non-emergency medical care more of an ordinary product , one that people pay for the way they pay for food and housing and cars and World of Warcraft expansion packs and the other necessities of modern life , allowing insurance to be insurance : a financial product that helps to mitigate certain risks related to unexpected health-care costs . This would allow for the emergence of robust , competitive , consumer-oriented markets like we have in cellphones and pornography and other innovative markets where choices abound and prices keep going down because the consumer is king .
But there will be scarcity . Somebody will put his hand out and say , “ Pay me . ”
This brings up something economists call “ elasticity of demand. ” That is a fancy way of saying that when you roll into the local BMW dealer and find out that that i8 costs $ 150,000 , you say , “ No , thanks , ” and you get a Honda Civic instead , but when you are rolled into the emergency room with a broken leg or a non-functioning heart , you don ’ t talk about prices at all , and , even if you did , you aren ’ t normally going to say “ No ” to any price when the alternative is sickness and pain and death . But not every medical procedure is a life-and-death matter , and , even in the matter of serial chronic conditions such as diabetes , there is opportunity for comparison shopping and negotiating . The other kind of medical problem is why you have insurance .
We have perfectly functional markets in all sorts of life-and-death goods . They expect you to pay up at the grocery store , too , but poor people are not starving in the American streets , because we came up with this so-crazy-it-just-might-work idea of giving poor people money and money analogues ( such as food stamps ) to pay for food . It is not a perfect system , but it is preferable , as we know from unhappy experiences abroad , to having the government try to run the farms , as government did in the Soviet Union , or the grocery stores , as government does in hungry , miserable Venezuela . The Apple Store has its shortcomings , to be sure , but I ’ d rather have a health-care system that looks like the Apple Store than one that looks like a Venezuelan grocery store .
There is a certain libertarian tendency to look at messes such as the Affordable Care Act and the American Health Care Act and throw up one ’ s hands , exclaiming : “ Just let markets work ! ” We should certainly let markets work , but not “ just. ” We aren ’ t going to let children with congenital birth defects suffer just because they might have stupid and irresponsible parents , and we are not going to let old people who have outlived their retirement savings die of pneumonia because we don ’ t want to spend a couple of thousand bucks treating them . But we also do not have a society in which everybody is on Section 8 and food stamps , nor do we want one . Developing sensible , intelligently run , reasonably generous welfare programs for those who can not or simply have not done it for themselves is a relatively small project , but trying to have government impose some kind of political discipline on the entirety of the health-care system — which is as explicit a part of the current daft Republican health-care program as it is of Obamacare — is a different kind of project entirely .
Scarcity is not an economic theory . You can experience it for yourself any time you like , on a desert island or the streets of New York City . It is an aspect of reality , and the health-care reformers eventually will have to get around to taking reality into consideration .
Health Care Facts are Hard to Swallow , but Republicans Have To