ObamaCare made it through nearly 10 months of repeal attempts with Republicans in full control of Washington .
It ’ s the first test of how the Trump administration will handle enrollment under the law it claims is “ imploding. ” With the president making no secret of his desire to kill the law completely , Democrats accuse the administration of `` sabotage '' and say the number of new enrollees is likely to drop as a result .
That would lift the uninsured rate , which has fallen dramatically since the law went into effect , and could hurt ObamaCare ’ s sustainability by leaving a smaller , sicker and costlier pool of enrollees .
“ There ’ s a renewed urgency that I haven ’ t seen in the past couple of years , ” said Lori Lodes , a former Obama administration health official who runs Get America Covered , a group working with local officials to fill the gap left by the Trump administration ’ s cuts .
Since Trump came into office , he has taken a series of actions that could undermine the law . He signed an executive order that instructed agencies to loosen ObamaCare rules , slashed advertising and outreach dollars , cut enrollment staff and earlier this month cut off payments to insurers that reimburse them for giving discounts to low-income enrollees .
One influential analyst predicts confusion from these actions will lead enrollment to drop several million compared to last year . Charles Gaba projects the numbers could drop to between 9.5 and 10 million people this year , down from 12.2 million last year , though he notes it is hard to predict .
Josh Peck , a former Obama administration health official , has estimated that the new administration ’ s cutbacks to outreach alone will lead to 1.1 million fewer people signing up for coverage this year .
Gallup found this month that the uninsured rate has already started to tick back up this year after a sharp decline when ObamaCare went into effect in 2014 . Since the law went into full effect , the number of uninsured has dropped from around 45 million to 28 million .
The Trump administration will also not put out an enrollment goal this year , in a break with the practice under Obama .
The administration faces a difficult balancing act in overseeing a law it opposes but that is still on the books . Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) officials pushed back on the idea they are sabotaging the law , arguing that ObamaCare was already flawed .
The administration says it will still be carrying out many functions , like a call center and email alerts to consumers . Asked if the administration wants the sign-up period to go smoothly , an HHS official said “ absolutely . ”
However , the administration slashed funding for advertising and outreach by 90 percent and cut funding to outside groups , known as navigators , that help people enroll .
More broadly , experts say the several near-misses in Congress to repeal the law this year could leave consumers wondering if ObamaCare is even still in effect .
President Trump ’ s recent comments that the law is “ dead ” are not helping , according to Ceci Connolly , CEO of the Alliance of Community Health Plans .
“ Some folks might hear that and think either , ‘ I don ’ t have to sign up for insurance anymore , ’ or maybe ‘ my insurance isn ’ t available , ’ ” said Connolly , whose group includes community-based health insurers , many of which participate in the ObamaCare markets .
Trump ’ s decision to cut off the payments to insurers has also led to some premium spikes as insurers try to compensate for the loss .
Connolly said that her insurer group had “ no heads up whatsoever ” before Trump 's move earlier this month .
An official with America ’ s Health Insurance Plans ( AHIP ) said that she is “ hopeful ” that the ObamaCare markets will continue to stabilize but that uncertainty from the administration and Congress has been an obstacle .
“ The uncertainty has certainly been challenging this year and we 're hoping to get on some more level footing next year , ” said Kelley Turek , AHIP 's executive director of employer and commercial policy .
She added that insurers are “ trying to step up to the plate a little bit more ” in their outreach efforts to consumers to fill the gap left by the administration ’ s cutbacks .
The enrollment period is about half as long this year , ending Dec. 15 , another focus of messaging .
The Trump administration pushed back on the idea that its cuts are part of an effort to sabotage the law .
“ It ’ s important to remember that ObamaCare enrollment was in decline before President Trump took office , ” said HHS spokesman Matt Lloyd . Enrollment dropped from 12.7 million in 2016 to 12.2 million in 2017 , though Democrats argue that Trump administration cutbacks in January played a role .
“ The previous administration inflicted heavy damage on the individual market — premiums doubled , insurers dropped out of the individual market in droves , millions of Americans saw their plans cancelled because Washington didn ’ t approve of them , and millions more paid billions in fines to avoid the kind of coverage ObamaCare dictated , ” he added . “ That ’ s not evidence of a healthy , competitive market nor one that is best serving individuals and families . ”
If enrollment falls significantly short this year , it could hurt the stability of the law , given that the people most likely to remain are the sickest enrollees who most need health insurance and are the costliest .
“ If enrollment drops and healthy people drop out the effect would be destabilizing , ” said Larry Levitt , a health policy expert at the Kaiser Family Foundation . “ In this political environment what happens during open enrollment will be really important both symbolically and practically . ”
But experts emphasize that the law is still on the books and financial assistance is still available to help people afford coverage .
“ We 're really trying to make sure that consumers are aware of the fact that things aren ’ t really changing that much , ” Turek said .