Republicans voted on a plan to delay the Affordable Care Act for one year , raising the prospects of an Oct. 1 government shutdown .
Senate Democrats and President Obama oppose any attempt to dismantle the law
The government will shutdown on Tuesday if no stopgap spending bill is enacted
WASHINGTON — Congress moved the nation closer to a government shutdown on Tuesday as House Republicans voted early Sunday 231-192 to advance a stopgap spending measure to delay implementation of President Obama 's health care law for one year .
`` We will do our job and send this bill over , and then it 's up to the Senate to pass it and stop a government shutdown , '' House GOP leaders said in a joint statement .
The House voted just past midnight ET to send the bill back to the Senate following a day of vigorous debate over the Affordable Care Act , which begins open enrollment on Tuesday .
House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer , D-Md. , countered that the public had litigated the health care law in 2012 with the re-election of Obama and accused Republicans of `` rampant irresponsibility '' that increased the prospects of an Oct. 1 shutdown .
`` By the way , we won this debate in the election , '' Hoyer said on the House floor , `` But ( Republicans ) refuse to accept the results of the election . ''
The House also voted 248-174 to repeal a 2.3 % tax on medical devices enacted to help pay for implementation of the law .
The House then voted unanimously on a separate measure to ensure that the U.S. military continues to get paid if the government shuts down . Because no annual spending bills have been enacted , a shutdown would stop the flow of paychecks to troops .
Members of Congress , however , would continue to be paid if a shutdown occurs .
CLOSE The Republican-run House has voted to avoid a partial government shutdown next week but also delay President Barack Obama 's health care law . ( September 29 ) AP
But the House GOP amendments affecting the Affordable Care Act face certain defeat in the Senate , where Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , D-Nev. , said he will not support any bill that dismantles the law . Obama also said he would veto any such bill in the unlikely event it reaches his desk .
In a statement , Reid called the House 's action `` pointless '' and reiterated that the Senate will reject the GOP 's latest version of the stopgap bill .
`` After weeks of futile political games from Republicans , we are still at square one : Republicans must decide whether to pass the Senate 's clean ( bill ) , or force a Republican government shutdown , '' Reid said .
White House spokesman Jay Carney called the plan `` reckless and irresponsible '' and said , `` Any member of the Republican Party who votes for this bill is voting for a shutdown . ''
The House also voted to extend the length of the funding resolution by one month from Nov. 15 to Dec. 15 , and included a controversial `` conscience clause '' that would delay a requirement under the health care law that employers provide health insurance that covers contraceptives for women .
House Republicans expressed confidence that the latest strategy could hold more promise in the Senate than their original effort to defund the health care law . `` I think there are some senators over there who may be in cycle that secretly want a one-year delay and we just got to find the right mix that enables them to justify that vote , '' said Rep. Richard Hudson , R-N.C .
However , during Senate votes this week , all 54 Senate Democrats stuck together to strip out language defunding the law . Republicans would need 14 Senate Democrats to break party ranks to side with all 46 Senate Republicans , and there is no indication those votes exist . Even if they did , the president has said he would veto any legislation to undermine the law .
House Republicans ' maneuvering is unlikely to force the tough political votes on Senate Democrats they are seeking . Reid can use Senate procedures to table the two amendments in one vote , requiring only a 51-vote majority , on Monday . If that occurs — as expected — the stopgap bill remains in the House , increasing pressure on Boehner to allow an up-or-down vote on the floor to avoid the shutdown .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , D-Calif. , has said Democrats stand ready to provide votes to help moderate Republicans pass the Senate-passed stopgap bill . However , Boehner would likely lose most of his lawmakers and faces internal party pressures to hold firm against the health care law .
Reid warned Republicans that the only way to avoid a shutdown was to approve the Senate bill . `` This is it . Time is gone . Our rules are different than the House , '' he said Friday . The Senate is not in session this weekend .
`` We 're getting closer to a shutdown , but if the Senate acts as quick as it 's capable we can avoid that . Let 's see what they send back to us , '' said Rep. Tom Cole , R-Okla. , on Saturday . `` We 're working the process the way we 're supposed to work it . ''
Further fueling fears of a shutdown was Reid 's acknowledgment that House and Senate leaders are not communicating . In previous budget clashes , behind-the-scenes negotiations were underway . `` We 've made it very clear that the only way to solve this problem is just accept what we 've done , just accept it , '' he said .
Boehner 's office said Friday that they had not heard from Obama all week .
Most of the public would not feel the effects of a shutdown immediately . Government operations considered essential , like mail delivery , air-traffic control and Social Security and Medicare , would continue unabated , but national parks and museums would close . Certain government employees would not get paid , but they would receive back pay when the government reopens . A short-term shutdown is unlikely to cause much long-term economic damage unless it drags on longer .
House Republicans are also working separately to put together a legislative package tied to an impending vote to raise the debt ceiling , the nation 's borrowing limit , that will hit Oct. 17 , according to Treasury Secretary Jack Lew . The bill would suspend the debt ceiling through the 2014 elections in exchange for a one-year delay of implementation of the health care law and instructions on how to overhaul the federal tax code without raising additional revenue .
The package includes a grab bag of perennially popular GOP legislation that is unpalatable to Democrats , such as construction of a new oil pipeline from Canada to Texas , and increasing means testing for Medicaid recipients .
The package has also divided House Republicans for a number of reasons , forcing leaders to delay initial plans to vote on the package this weekend . Many lawmakers want to resolve the stopgap spending bill first , while others are concerned that the package does not include enough long-term deficit reduction .
Obama has maintained that he will veto any legislation that seeks to delay or defund his signature domestic achievement , and Democrats have vowed not to negotiate over the debt ceiling . There is no precedent for a U.S. debt limit default , but there is consensus that it could have sweeping , negative consequences for the U.S. economy .