Presidents with no experience in the private sector , and virtually none in domestic or foreign policy , will always be trapped by the law of unintended consequences . They just don ’ t understand how things work , or don ’ t work . While ignorance might allow them to speak with astounding confidence , they are often shocked by the results of their policies . This particularly inexperienced president will go down , politely , as “ historically surprised . ”
The central point made by conservative Republicans , or Democrats who appreciate the free market , is that the private sector , properly directed , is the most effective way to create economic growth and solve complex problems such as heath care cost control , quality and availability . Republican leadership has been entirely inarticulate on this point , though , or has gotten lost in internecine weeds and warfare , and has not convinced the public of this fundamental difference between the Republican and Democratic approaches to governance .
Now President Obama has taken care of that with a gift that will reset the course for American political debate for decades . Obamacare , in particular , and the Obama administration in general , have provided the crystal-clear conclusion that government should not be put in charge of creating huge , new organizations for managing massive programs of economic change , because government is , fundamentally , not as good as the private sector at designing and managing these types of institutions .
In that context , if anyone ever needed a laboratory test or case study on why America should never entertain the concept of a “ single-payer , ” government-run health system , Obamacare has provided that . Even at this early stage , it is obvious to nearly everyone that costs are skyrocketing , that there is a sinister wealth transfer from the young to the old and illegal immigrants , that doctors and health insurers are fleeing , that availability and quality of care will decline , that the government is incompetent to run this complex program , and that lies and political deception have been used to cover all this up . It is unlikely that any sane politician would ever again entertain the concept of “ single-payer ” socialized medicine .
Now some will argue that Medicare and Medicaid have been successfully run by the government for years . Really ? A careful look at the numbers confirms that the government has been a complete failure at controlling the costs of these programs , that they have driven up everyone else ’ s health care costs , that ham-fisted approaches to squeezing doctors have replaced competitive market mechanisms that might have reduced costs and improved quality , that benefits and access to care have been subtly reduced , that fraud may be as high as 30 percent of the program costs , and that Medicare is on the brink of bankruptcy . Private-sector businesses , bred in a tough , competitive market , could do a massively better job than that .
Of course , the real problem with this administration is far more fundamental than Obamacare . The president has never built or managed a business of any sort . He has never stayed awake at night worrying about meeting a payroll , getting a loan for his business , creating a budget , controlling his costs , holding employees accountable , paying his business taxes — ever . It is no wonder that he appears to have no idea how to launch a program to restructure nearly one-fifth of the U.S. economy . He and his senior team are , simply , incompetent ( stating it in the most polite way possible ) . He doesn ’ t have any idea how to design a health care program , how to create management processes , how to run it , how to build information-technology systems , how to pick people who do , how to price it , or how to hold anyone accountable for anything . He really had virtually nothing to do with designing the Obamacare legislation , so he probably didn ’ t know that a government-run system like this wouldn ’ t work .
If he had ever participated in the real U.S. economy , even a little bit , he would have had a lot more respect for those who are competent to build and run successful economic enterprises . Companies that compete and succeed really are magical geese that lay golden eggs , and the United States , properly led by those who understand that , has been amazingly successful at breeding those magic geese , which feed us all .
If the president knew anything about the U.S. economy , he would have understood that you do not starve your geese with massive new taxes , you do not throw away all the golden eggs on worthless government programs , and you do not behave like a king when you are expected to be an accountable CEO .
The good news in this really sad situation is that the American people may be waking up to the credibility and competence issues of this administration .
At the same time , however , arguments and plans for a truly competitive , market-based , solution to health care will finally be heard . With that , the quality and availability of health care can increase . Those without proper access to health care can get it . If the political process properly frames the issue and allows the market to work , it will happen . That is what America does . The president should learn it , appreciate it , support it and not get in the way . He should lead from behind and salvage the rest of this administration .
Grady Means served as assistant to Vice President Nelson Rockefeller in the White House and oversaw the Rand Corp. ’ s National Health Insurance Experiment , which tested the concept of single-payer health care for America in the 1970s .