Democrats are firing on all cylinders Tuesday , roasting the Trump administration ’ s plans to roll back $ 15 billion in previously allocated funding because it requests Congress claw back money from the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program ( CHIP ) .
Yet , a great number of congressional Democrats voted to do just that in the March $ 1.3 trillion spending bill .
House and Senate Democrats are already posturing to vote against the administration ’ s proposal , because nearly 50 percent of the requested rescissions come from two accounts within CHIP — $ 7 billion the White House claims are funds that can ’ t be or won ’ t be spent under law and an additional $ 2 billion in contingency funds . The White House told reporters Monday evening that a good portion of the $ 7 billion cut to CHIP funding comes from 2017 ( $ 5 billion ) , which has now expired .
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer came out against Trump ’ s rescission package Monday , setting the tone for an upcoming fight .
“ Let ’ s be honest about what this is : President Trump and Republicans in Congress are looking to tear apart the bipartisan ( CHIP ) , hurting middle-class families and low-income children , to appease the most conservative special interests and feel better about blowing up the deficit to give the wealthiest few and biggest corporations huge tax breaks , ” Schumer said Monday .
Schumer ’ s counterpart in the House , Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , said her colleagues were not ready to strike a deal .
“ These Republican rescissions show the hypocrisy of a GOP Congress that insists on tight budgets for children and families while handing enormous , unpaid-for giveaways to corporations and the wealthiest , ” Pelosi said in a statement to members Monday .
Schumer , Pelosi and many prominent Democrats have already voted to rescind CHIP funding not even three months ago in March , making their statement ’ s Tuesday all the more confusing .
Members of Congress voted in late March to rescind $ 3.1 billion from the CHIP Contingency Fund and $ 3.6 billion in funds provided to states , totaling just under $ 7 billion .
SEC . 526 . Not later than 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter , beginning with the first quarter of fiscal year 2013 , the Departments of Labor , Health and Human Services and Education and the Social Security Administration shall provide the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and Senate a quarterly report on the status of balances of appropriations : Provided , That for balances that are unobligated and uncommitted , committed , and obligated but unexpended , the quarterly reports shall separately identify the amounts attributable to each source year of appropriation ( beginning with fiscal year 2012 , or , to the extent feasible , earlier fiscal years ) from which balances were derived . ( rescission ) SEC . 527 . Of any available amounts appropriated under section 2104 ( a ) ( 21 ) of the Social Security Act ( 42 U.S.C . 1397dd ) that are unobligated as of September 25 , 2018 , $ 3,572,000,000 are hereby rescinded as of such date . SEC . 528 . Amounts deposited in the Child Enrollment Contingency Fund prior to the beginning of fiscal year 2018 under section 2104 ( n ) ( 2 ) of the Social Security Act and the income derived from investment of those funds pursuant to section 2104 ( n ) ( 2 ) ( C ) of that Act , shall not be available for obligation in this fiscal year . SEC . 529 . Of the amounts deposited in the Child Enrollment Contingency Fund for fiscal year 2018 under section 2104 ( n ) ( 2 ) of the Social Security Act and the income derived from investment of those funds pursuant to section 2104 ( n ) ( 2 ) ( C ) of that Act , $ 1,967,678,000 shall not be available for obligation in this fiscal year . ( rescission )
Democratic leadership aren ’ t the only ones crying foul about the president ’ s rescission proposal . Democratic senators tweeted their disdain for the proposal , because it contains requests for cuts to the CHIP program .
Going back on a deal is bad . Going back on a deal in order to cut billions from children ’ s health insurance is worse . https : //t.co/KLcjyk8LpW — Mark Warner ( @ MarkWarner ) May 8 , 2018
We worked in a bipartisan way to find common ground and guarantee 10 years of funding for the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program . Now , after giving the top 1 % tax breaks President Trump wants to slash the CHIP program for kids.https : //t.co/zAMMEHEuew — Sen. Tammy Baldwin ( @ SenatorBaldwin ) May 8 , 2018
Let ’ s be clear : the GOP blew up our deficit in order to give big corporations & the top 1 % a tax cut they didn ’ t need . And now to help pay for it , @ realDonaldTrump wants to cut children ’ s healthcare that millions of families rely on . Is there no level he won ’ t stoop to ? https : //t.co/mXbk09RaIy — Senator Cortez Masto ( @ SenCortezMasto ) May 7 , 2018
This is outrageous ! Parents and children in Michigan rely on CHIP for important medical care . How can they have peace of mind if the Admin keeps threatening to take funding away ? We worked across the aisle to guarantee 10 years of CHIP funding . https : //t.co/p4counIirL — Sen. Debbie Stabenow ( @ SenStabenow ) May 7 , 2018
This proposal is a shameful betrayal of children . This Administration and congressional Republicans passed a massive tax giveaway to their donors and big corporations , and now they want vulnerable children to pay for it . https : //t.co/3PSIE4vYUp — Senator Bob Casey ( @ SenBobCasey ) May 7 , 2018
All five of the senators who tweeted about CHIP voted for the March omnibus .
Furthermore , lawmakers agreed to a 10-year extension CHIP funding in early February . The deal included $ 7 billion towards community health centers , $ 6 billion to deal with opioids and mental care and other provisions supported on a bipartisan basis .
Democratic Sen. Debbie Stabenow of Michigan put forth an amendment in 2011 that called for the rescinding of $ 44 billion in unobligated funds–an amount three times the size of the administration ’ s proposal . The amendment won the support of 81 senators , including Democratic Sens . Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut , Dianne Feinstein of California , Chris Coons of Delaware , Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota , Joe Manchin of West Virginia , Claire McCaskill of Missouri , Bob Melendez of New Jersey , Bill Nelson of Florida and Ron Wyden of Oregon .
GOP Sen. Susan Collins of Maine , who is ambivalent about the president ’ s proposal because of CHIP funding , also voted for Stabenow ’ s amendment in 2011 .