The president ’ s proudest achievement is chaotic and off schedule — at best , Lowry says . | REUTERS The Obamacare mess
Washington is riven by conflict and deep-seated division . It is rare indeed that both sides can agree on anything consequential . Therefore it is incredibly heartening that there is now bipartisan agreement that the implementation of Obamacare is a mess .
Republicans have long maintained this of the Affordable Care Act . But now the Obama administration has lent its implicit assent with its astonishing decision to delay by a year the law ’ s employer mandate . This is what the administration calls , via a blog post by the Treasury Department ’ s assistant secretary for tax policy announcing the decision , “ Continuing to Implement the ACA in a Careful , Thoughtful Manner . ”
The administration can call it whatever it wants , but there is no hiding the embarrassment of a climbdown on a high-profile feature of President Barack Obama ’ s signature initiative — although the administration seemed determined to do all it could to hide it . If Bloomberg hadn ’ t broken the news on Tuesday , the administration was apparently planning to announce it on July 3 — only because the day before Thanksgiving and Christmas Eve were too far off .
The reason for the delay , we ’ re told , is incompetence . The administration ’ s story is that it simply couldn ’ t find a way to implement the insurance reporting requirements on employers within the time frame set out in the law . In this telling , the mandate was merely collateral damage — it had to be put off , along with the accompanying $ 2,000-per-employee fine on firms with more than 50 employees who don ’ t offer health coverage .
This just happens to be the mandate that is causing howls of pain from businesses and creating perverse incentives for them to limit their hiring or to hire part- rather than full-time employees . And it just happens that 2015 — the new target year for implementation — is after a midterm election year rather during one . It must all be a lucky break .
Explaining the decision , Obama apparatchik Valerie Jarret issued a stalwart communiqué from Central Command that should take an honored place in the annals of blatant , unembarrassed hackery .
Her message : All is well . Nothing to see here . Yes , maybe we ’ ve delayed implementation of the ( hilariously euphemistic ) “ employer responsibility payments ” ( aka fines ) , but don ’ t worry : it ’ s “ full steam ahead ” with the health-care exchanges this October . Never mind that determining eligibility for the exchanges depends on employers reporting their insurance offerings — reporting that now won ’ t happen .