* * Want FOX News Halftime Report in your inbox every day ? Sign up here . * *
On the roster : Harris fumbles on health insurance - Dems embrace left wing for Trump rebuttal - Dems delay vote on attorney general - Biden ’ s non-campaign rolls on - Pittsburgh vs. All yinz
Imagine if the Los Angeles Rams had to play the Super Bowl against the Patriots and the NFC Championship against the Saints at the same time .
That ’ s what running for president is like . We think of the primaries and the general election as two different games , but the truth is that whomever Democrats nominate is already auditioning for the general electorate – including loosely attached Democrats , independents and even some Republicans .
As Sen. Kamala Harris , D-Calif. , is finding out today , the demands of the two games are often quite contradictory . Her glib , facile answer to a serious question about health insurance is the political equivalent to a fumble on her own ten-yard line .
Being the frontrunner isn ’ t all puff pieces and pep rallies .
In an interview with CNN , Harris was asked about the downstream consequences of her proposal to make Medicare , the entitlement program which provides health insurance for Americans age 65 and older , available to every citizen , regardless of age .
The proposal is the key policy of one of her rivals , Sen. Bernie Sanders , I-Vt. , and has become a litmus test for liberal activists assessing the 2020 Democratic contenders . It would also blow the bottom out of the private , employer-based health insurance which provides coverage for about half of all Americans .
Employers generally hate having to be in the insurance business and many , especially those with large workforces , would be delighted to be able to shunt that responsibility over to Medicare . They chip in for extra coverage or otherwise defray costs and get to kiss goodbye one of the biggest hassles for companies in labor-intensive businesses . That reduced pool of customers would make insurance more expensive for those that remain in the private sector , which would cause more employers to follow suit , and so on and so on .
Proponents and opponents of the proposal agree on where the road would end : the demolition of the system as it has mostly existed since the 1960s . They disagree about how quickly or chaotically that would happen and certainly are at odds about whether that is good or needful , but agree that it would begin the end of health insurance as we know it .
Asked about this consequence , Harris was dismissive to the point of blitheness .
“ The idea is that everyone gets access to medical care and you do n't have to go through the process of going through an insurance company , having them give you approval , going through all the paperwork , all of the delay that may require , ” Harris said . “ Who of all us have not had that situation where you have to wait for approval and the doctor says , ‘ I do n't know if your insurance company is going to cover this . ’ ”
“ Let ’ s eliminate all of that , ” she added . “ Let ’ s move on . ”
Now , we want to be generous of spirit here and assume that Harris was blowing off another part of the question and entirely ignoring the downstream consequences . The elimination of the insurance that covers something like 160 million people isn ’ t something even the most oblivious politician would do .
But that phrase “ let ’ s eliminate all of that ” will now be stuck to her until she comes to the end of the trail . John “ I actually did vote for the $ 87 billion before I voted against it ” Kerry knows what we ’ re talking about .
As the excellent and useful polling from the Kaiser Family Foundation shows , Democrats enjoy a substantial advantage on the question of health insurance and health care . That ’ s traditionally a better issue for the Blue Team and the Republicans ’ 2017 ObamaCare debacle erased the considerable damage that the original passage and enacting of the law did to the Democratic brand .
Here ’ s Kaiser : “ Net favorability towards a national Medicare-for-all plan ( measured as the share in favor minus the share opposed ) … ranges as high as +45 percentage points… Yet , on the other side of the debate , net favorability drops as low as -44 percentage points when people hear the argument that this would lead to delays in some people getting some medical tests and treatments . Net favorability is also negative if people hear it would threaten the current Medicare program ( -28 percentage points ) , require most Americans to pay more in taxes ( -23 percentage points ) , or eliminate private health insurance companies ( -21 percentage points ) . ”
Everybody wants a unicorn . Nobody wants to have to clean all that glittery manure out of the stall .
Republicans know this and will absolutely hammer Harris or any Democrat on the subject . The scaremongering around ObamaCare will look like kids ’ stuff compared to what is said about the big government health insurance program backed by a self-described socialist Senator from Vermont . It ’ s a fact .
Harris and other Democrats have glommed on to Sanders ’ plan as a bumper-sticker solution . And given the fact that the number of uninsured Americans is climbing and voters are increasingly anxious about the situation , Democrats certainly are right to want something the sounds generous , simple and direct .
But as Barack Obama learned and then Donald Trump said , “ Nobody knew health care could be so complicated. ” Lolz .
Voters don ’ t like surprises and deeply mistrust any change that involves their policies or care . Democrats loved being able to run in 2018 on “ saving ObamaCare ” or “ protecting your insurance. ” It will be less fun to say exactly what they want to do .
And that goes double with a plan that involves millions of Americans potentially being dumped into government-run health insurance and new pressures it will apply on doctors who already dislike the complexity and measly rates of Medicare .
It tells us a lot about how Harris ’ background in California politics is insufficient preparation for the national version . But it also tells us even more about the dangers ahead for Democrats as Sanders to continue to exact his revenge on the party that passed him over in 2016 . If he succeeds in sticking his party with this one , Democrats will kiss off millions of votes from the very group they need so much : Suburban , middle and upper-middle class moms who are very skeptical about Trump .
The lesson of ObamaCare is that American voters are compassionate and want to make sure everyone has access to care . But the moment that plan affects those who already have coverage , it gets chilly out there real quick .
“ When the demand is equal to the quantity of goods at market , the consumer generally pays the duty ; but when the markets happen to be overstocked , a great proportion falls upon the merchant , and sometimes not only exhausts his profits , but breaks in upon his capital . I am apt to think that a division of the duty , between the seller and the buyer , more often happens than is commonly imagined. ” – Alexander Hamilton , Federalist No . 35
Variety : “ NBA Star Kyrie Irving will star in and executive produce a currently untitled horror movie with Imagine Entertainment about an Oklahoma hotel that has a reputation of being haunted . Imagine Entertainment has preemptively optioned an upcoming Players ’ Tribune article , an oral history of experiences from NBA stars who have stayed at the Skirvin Hotel in Oklahoma City . The hotel is frequented by traveling NBA teams , but some players refuse to stay there because of its reputation . The hotel was opened in 1911 and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . … The project is being developed as a horror film blending scares , satire , wit and social commentary inspired by the folklore of the Skirvin Hotel . The hauntings are believed to have started in the 1930s when the hotel ’ s owner had an affair with a chambermaid which led to her tragic demise . ”
[ Average includes : Quinnipiac University : 38 % approve - 57 % disapprove ; Monmouth University : 43 % approve - 53 % disapprove ; NBC News/WSJ : 43 % approve - 54 % disapprove ; ABC News/WaPo : 38 % approve - 58 % disapprove ; Fox News : 43 % approve - 54 % disapprove . ]
WaPo : “ Democrats have tapped Georgia ’ s Stacey Abrams to deliver the response to President Trump ’ s State of the Union address , Senate Minority Leader Charles E. Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) announced Tuesday . Abrams narrowly lost the state ’ s race for governor in November after a lengthy dispute over blocked votes . She will address the nation in a prime-time speech shortly after Trump finishes his address to a joint session of Congress next Tuesday night . ‘ She is just a great spokesperson . She ’ s an incredible leader . She has led the charge for voting rights , which is at the root of just about everything else . … I ’ m very excited that she ’ s agreed to be the respondent to the president , ’ Schumer told reporters . Abrams ’ s political future is the source of much speculation . Earlier this month , she met in Washington with Schumer , who is seeking candidates to run against Sen. David Perdue ( R-Ga. ) in 2020 . ”
Republicans may block Trump from another shutdown - Politico : “ Senate Republicans can ’ t stomach another shutdown . After weathering 35 days of a partial government closure , the Senate GOP is dreading the possibility another one will hit in less than three weeks — a sentiment that could prevent President Donald Trump from closing the government again . … Most GOP lawmakers dutifully stuck with Trump in public as the partial government shutdown dragged on . But privately , Republican support began to crack as their polling and the economy both suffered . After a half-dozen GOP senators defected last week , Trump dropped his demands for border wall money before a full-scale revolt unfolded . … But while White House press secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Monday that Trump ‘ doesn ’ t want to go through another shutdown , ’ she declined to rule it out if Congress doesn ’ t come up with a border security plan to Trump ’ s liking . Neither did House Freedom Caucus Chairman Mark Meadows ( R-N.C. ) , a close Trump confidant . ”
Perdue says Trump wants ‘ simple ’ border wall deal - WaPo : “ Sen . David Perdue ( R-Ga. ) , who lunched privately with the president Sunday at the White House , also indicated that Trump is prepared to act on his own should a new committee on Capitol Hill struggle to come up with an agreement on the wall that satisfies him . Trump is mulling the prospect of issuing a national emergency declaration to start wall construction without congressional approval — a move that will almost certainly face an immediate challenge in the courts . ‘ He wants as simple of a solution as we can get , ’ Perdue said in an interview Monday . While the president would like a more sweeping immigration package at some point , Perdue said Trump acknowledges ‘ that ’ s just not realistic in three weeks . ’ ”
Pergram : ‘ Why Democrats are unlikely to budge on next round of border security negotiations ’ - Fox News : “ Does anyone really think we won ’ t be back here in three weeks , trying to avert another crisis and fund the government ? … If the president agreed to re-open the government after achieving nothing and Republicans started taking the blame , why does the president think the matrix changes in mid-February ? Democrats gave nothing . They have very little to lose in the next round . … The key to the three-week window is a conference committee , a blend of bipartisan House and Senate negotiators , charged with forging a border security agreement before Feb. 15 . Otherwise , we might be right back where we were . … There ’ s a reason the government shut down in the fall of 1995 during an epic standoff between President Bill Clinton and House Speaker Newt Gingrich re-opened later , and then shut down again . The sides thought they were on a track to resolve their issues . But they weren ’ t . ”
WaPo : “ A planned Senate Judiciary Committee vote on William P. Barr ’ s nomination to serve as attorney general has been delayed for a week , as Democrats continue to raise concerns about whether he would allow special counsel Robert S. Mueller III to finish his probe and publicize the results unimpeded . The delay … is the latest reflection of the deep partisan tension surrounding Barr ’ s nomination , most of which centers on Democrats ’ desire to protect Mueller ’ s probe from being unduly constrained . The committee postponed its vote on Barr as one of 46 nominations the panel was scheduled to vote on Tuesday but decided to delay until its next meeting . In both his public testimony and his written answers to senators ’ questions , Barr has repeatedly refused to give senators any firm guarantee that he will release Mueller ’ s report to Congress and the public free of redactions . ”
Whittaker : Mueller report ‘ close to being completed ’ - WaPo : “ The head of the Justice Department said Monday that special counsel Robert S. Mueller III ’ s Russia investigation is nearing an end , the first official acknowledgment that the probe ensnaring President Trump may soon reach a conclusion . Acting attorney general Matthew G. Whitaker made the comment during a news conference to announce indictments against a Chinese technology firm . Asked about his view of the Mueller probe in light of critical comments he made while working as a television pundit in 2017 , Whitaker said those statements were offered while he was a private citizen . ‘ I have been fully briefed on the investigation and I look forward to Director Mueller delivering the final report , ’ Whitaker said . ‘ I am comfortable that the decisions that were made are going to be reviewed . . . . Right now , you know , the investigation is , I think , close to being completed . ’ ”
Dems get antsier waiting for end date of Mueller probe - Politico : “ Before taking power , House Democrats vowed to give special counsel Robert Mueller the space needed to finish his work . Just four weeks in , however , sticking to that pledge is proving difficult . The possible clashes will be on display Tuesday morning when the new House Democratic Caucus meets for the first time to discuss Mueller ’ s investigation into President Donald Trump ’ s ties to Russia , a probe with no clear end in sight and ever-expanding subplots . For Speaker Nancy Pelosi and her committee chairs , the uncertainty surrounding the special counsel ’ s work presents a major challenge for keeping their liberal , rabble-rousing members in check… For now , the Democrats say they are proceeding on two tracks : Letting Mueller pursue criminal charges like the ones unsealed Friday against longtime Trump associate Roger Stone ; while lawmakers get to work examining whether anything the president has done rises to ‘ high crimes and misdemeanors ’ definition for impeachment . ”
Politico : “ Joe Biden brought his not-yet-a-campaign campaign to Florida ’ s biggest liberal bastion on Tuesday and said he ’ s ‘ a lot closer ’ to deciding to run for president in 2020 and plans to make ‘ the decision soon. ’ Biden made his remarks about his future plans during a question-and-answer portion of an event billed as ‘ An Evening with Vice President Joe Biden ’ at the Broward Center for the Performing Arts , which had so many people in attendance that Biden said even his daughter wondered about 2020 . … Tuesday ’ s event , one in a string of public appearances by Biden , had all the rhetorical trappings of a campaign speech for a Democratic candidate . He made sure to play up his civil rights bona fides , recounting stories of how he opposed segregation as a kid and then a lawmaker . He referenced in passing how he almost always ‘ voted with labor ’ unions . ”
Bloomberg takes on Trump ’ s business record - Fox News : “ Former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg on Tuesday took aim at President Trump during his first public stop during a two-day trip to New Hampshire , accusing the president of being a failure in both business and government . And the billionaire media mogul who ’ s seriously considering a run for the Democratic presidential nomination said if he made it to the White House , he ’ d put his philanthropic foundation into a blind trust . At the start of a speech he delivered on climate change at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics , the environmental and gun safety advocate said that Trump ‘ failed at business and now I think it ’ s fair to say he ’ s failing at governing . ’ ”
Flake will not challenge Trump in a 2020 - Fox News : “ Former Sen. Jeff Flake , R-Ariz. , announced Tuesday morning that he will not challenge President Trump in a 2020 Republican primary . Speaking on CBS – where he has signed on as a contributor – Flake said that he still believes that some Republican needs to challenge Trump in the primaries , but that it won ’ t be him . ‘ I have always said that I do hope that there is a Republican who challenges the president in the primary . I still hope that somebody does , but that somebody wo n't be me . I will not be a candidate , ’ Flake said on ‘ CBS This Morning. ’ … Flake himself fueled those rumors in November by saying he had ‘ not ruled it out. ’ But on Tuesday Flake said that it will be an uphill battle for any Republican trying to challenge Trump . ”
Q Poll : Voters trust Pelosi more with important issues than President Trump - Quinnipiac University
U.S. Treasury to borrow big bucks to finance deficit - Bloomberg
Stone pleads not guilty to Mueller charges in federal court - Fox News
Another one ? ‘ An Obscure White House Staffer ’ s Jaw-Dropping Trump Tell-All ’ - The Atlantic
Trump to sit down with CBS News ahead of Super Bowl - Variety
“ Don ’ t help elect Trump , you egotistical billionaire a * * hole. ” – A heckler yelled at Howard Schultz ’ s first stop on his book tour .
Sports Illustrated : “ Not everyone is pleased to see Tom Brady in yet another Super Bowl . Like in Pittsburgh , for instance , where the Patriots-Steelers rivalry lives on even though the Steelers missed the playoffs this year . During yesterday ’ s late afternoon news on KDKA , the Pittsburgh CBS affiliate , the station ran a chyron identifying Brady not as ‘ Patriots quarterback ’ but as ‘ known cheater. ’ … If the Patriots end up winning on Sunday , there will be a non-zero number of fans at the championship parade wearing anti-KDKA T-shirts . [ Sports Illustrated has ] reached out to KDKA to ask whether multiple people signed off on the ‘ cheater ’ chyron or if it was a rogue editor ’ s joke and whether they ’ ll be reprimanded . ”
“ Stupid but legal . Such is the Trump administration ’ s travel ban for people from seven Muslim countries . Of course , as with almost everything in American life , what should be a policy or even a moral issue becomes a legal one. ” – Charles Krauthammer ( 1950-2018 ) writing in the Washington Post on Feb. 9 , 2017 .
Chris Stirewalt is the politics editor for Fox News . Brianna McClelland contributed to this report . Want FOX News Halftime Report in your inbox every day ? Sign up here .