The Supreme Court this June could cut off millions of Americans from affordable Obamacare coverage . The response from the nation ’ s governors gathering in Washington this week was an assortment of shrugs .
███ interviewed more than a dozen governors , from both parties , this weekend at the National Governors Association winter meeting . Most said they ’ re in a wait-and-see zone . The Supreme Court will hear arguments next week , the decision is likely in late June and no one can foretell how the court will rule on its second major case that could strike at the heart of the president ’ s signature health law .
For some Republican governors it was a shrug of indifference . They say the onus falls on President Barack Obama and Congress to figure out what to do if the Supreme Court invalidates Affordable Care Act subsidies in their states . And if Obamacare falls apart , well , they say , good riddance .
For others — among them potential 2016 contenders Scott Walker of Wisconsin and John Kasich of Ohio — it ’ s a shrug of uncertainty . Wisconsin ’ s own state health program for certain low-income people relies on the federal exchange , and Walker called for the feds to come up with at least a short-term fix . Kasich says he ’ s working on contingency plans to protect people in his state , but he hasn ’ t said what that would look like , or how he ’ d pay for it .
The Obamacare opponents behind King argue that subsidies are illegal in 34 states using HealthCare.gov instead of running their own insurance exchanges . A ruling against the White House could abruptly halt financial assistance to roughly seven million of the people who signed up through the federal exchange this year .
Governors are largely on the sidelines of the subsidy fight — but in the center of the 2016 map . Administration allies doing Obamacare outreach worked hard to sign up millions of people in states like Florida , Ohio and Pennsylvania , the classic presidential battlegrounds , and homes to some of the likely contenders . If the White House loses in the Supreme Court , the consequences would play out amid the intensity of a presidential election , and in swing states that will host some of 2016 ’ s most competitive Senate and gubernatorial races .
The potential fallout from a decision for the plaintiffs has “ been probably the most frequent topic of conversation ” among the governors , said Tennessee Gov . Bill Haslam , who is also chairman of the Republican Governors Association . His assessment was that every governor ’ s “ first hope ” is that Washington will solve the problem .
Republican governors in Washington planned to press Obama during a White House meetings on Sunday and Monday . The court case came up when Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell held a closed-door luncheon session with governors Sunday .
Burwell has repeatedly declined to acknowledge or discuss contingency plans , saying over and over in public that the administration is confident it will win in court — a position she maintained during her meeting with governors , Haslam said . And the Republicans who now control both the House and Senate say they are working on a plan to replace Obamacare . Bu they ’ ve been trying to find a plan that the GOP can agree on for several years . The pressure ’ s stronger now because of King , but a breakthrough does not seem imminent .
“ It ’ s way too early to respond to a Supreme Court ruling which hasn ’ t been — in which there has not been a conclusion , ” said North Carolina Gov . Pat McCrory , a Republican who faces reelection in 2016 . “ The nation and the states don ’ t have a B Plan . … We would like to have a plan . We ’ re still trying to figure out the current Obamacare details because there ’ s a lot that changes every day . ”
The King plaintiffs argue that the subsidies are illegal through HealthCare.gov , and point to a specific phrase in the law that says the financial assistance flows through the state exchanges . Backers of the law say focusing on just four words ignores the full text of the sprawling law and the intent of the lawmakers who wrote and passed it .
For the most part , governors from affected states depicted themselves as spectators to the court drama .
“ We ’ re not going to speculate on options because the court can surprise you , ” said Iowa Gov . Terry Branstad , a Republican .
“ Remember the last time it came before them ? They totally came up with a different answer than people anticipated , ” Branstad added , referring to the 2012 case that upheld the individual mandate but made the state-based Medicaid expansion optional .
Florida Gov . Rick Scott , a conservative Republican , said the potential of an abrupt stop to the subsidies is Washington ’ s doing . It ’ s not his job to find a solution .
“ This is a federal program , it ’ s a federal problem , ” he said at the American Action Forum on Friday .
Yet Florida has 1.6 million people enrolled in Obamacare plans , more than any other state , including California and New York , which run their own exchanges and have governors who back Obamacare . Nine in 10 of those Floridians get subsidies . Scott declined to answer questions about whether he ’ d share in the blame if the newly covered became uncovered .