Sen. Elizabeth Warren ( D-Mass . ) appeared to concede that a transition from the current health care system to Medicare for All could result in the loss of millions of jobs , acknowledging it as `` part of the cost issue '' with her proposed plan , according to the Washington Examiner .
Warren , a front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination , was responding to a question about Medicare for All from New Hampshire Public Radio host Casey McDermott on Wednesday .
McDermott : Regardless of what kind of money is involved , Medicare for All would likely result in a pretty significant kind of shift in how our health care system is structured , and even supporters of that approach within the health policy world have said that would likely mean lost jobs in some form . An economist at the University of Massachusetts , Amherst , told Kaiser Health News earlier this year that that could result in about 2 million jobs lost . He said those would be mostly administrative positions in insurers , doctor 's offices , and he said that politicians who want to move toward that system , Medicare for All , have to think about what a `` just transition , '' a fair transition would look like .
Warren : So I agree . I think this is part of the cost issue and should be part of a cost plan .
Warren went on to talk about how much of American 's health care costs do n't go toward health care , pointing out large profits made by private insurance companies that charge high premiums while declining some services to patients , saying `` that 's not a sustainable health care system . ''
Elizabeth Warren : 2 million lost jobs 'part of the cost ' of 'Medicare for all ' youtu.be
While she may have some generally fair points about the flaws in the current health care system , she did n't address the potential loss of 2 million jobs , and whether getting premium-free health care is worth unemployment for those people who would suffer . Similarly , she has evaded questions about whether taxes will go up on middle class families in a transition to Medicare for All .