So Paul Ryan has had a rough week , and not just Paul Ryan . The failure of Ryancare has made Donald Trump angry , and when Trump is angry , Steve Bannon gets upset , and when Steve Bannon gets upset , people die . Or , at the very least , helicopters leave for Mar-a-Lago without Reince Priebus . Granted , last time Trump got furious with his staff , Bannon suffered too , but this time is different . Ryancare—both in substance and in timing—was a product of the Republican establishment , and that means people like Chief of Staff Priebus , House Speaker Ryan , and Vice President Mike Pence . As The New York Times reports , it was these three men who got Donald Trump to sign off on placing health care first on the legislative to-do list . So Bannon makes it onto Marine One . Reince gets put on K.P .
Despite the weakening of Trump , the death of Trumpcare/Ryancare in the crib has been a blessing to nearly everyone not named Paul Ryan , and that includes Donald Trump . Had Ryancare become law , it would have been bad for most people below the Republican poverty line , i.e. , $ 200,000 a year for a family of one , and Democrats would have reaped the political rewards . To be sure , Trump has taken a giant hit by campaigning hard for the bill and seeing it fail anyway , but he ’ ll have chances to recover , if he doesn ’ t self-destruct . He can move on to other campaign promises , even controversial ones , like building a border wall . At least these are more popular than Ryancare , as are most things . Car exhaust is more popular than Ryancare .
Even Paul Ryan has a second act ahead of him . He now moves on to fight for things closer to his heart , like tax cuts for the wealthy . While he has surely sunk even further in Trump ’ s estimation , he has a good chance of being spared Trump ’ s direct wrath . Trump needs Ryan ( I tried to explain their symbiotic relationship yesterday ) , and there ’ s no obvious replacement for him , either . Pence remains important as an emissary , even if his counsel will suffer a drop in value . So , if Trump needs someone to abuse , it ’ s going to be Reince . Perhaps Priebus will be instructed to bend over when approached by Trump , to allow for easier kicking . Of course , it ’ s not fair that Priebus , a man of some stature in his recent past , should have to take on such a role , but Chris Christie is in New Jersey .
Outside the White House , the Freedom Caucus , at whose feet much of the blame for defeat of the bill can be laid , will weather some attacks from the White House . Maybe some nasty midnight tweeting follows this weekend . But it will be O.K . Its members are likelier now to go along with some other legislation that they don ’ t love but feel obligated to support , in order to repair the rift . Wall funding is an easy way to do that—low cost , relative to most other things , and justifiable as a way of preventing spending on things like social services for people who would otherwise make their way illegally across the border . Tax cuts are always popular too , although the outlays associated with Obamacare will require that they be smaller .
But what a week for the Republican Party overall ! While the Democratic Party is impossible to love—perhaps , at times , even impossible not to hate—at least it takes policy seriously . The G.O.P . is at this point just a quack . If dissidents among the Freedom Caucus members are rigid , at least they had serious convictions about what they hope to achieve concretely . By contrast , Paul Ryan and his allies just want to get something out the door and get on to tax cuts . The establishment G.O.P . exists to reward its donors with cheap labor , cheap imports , low taxes , and—because why not ? —war . This establishment is what G.O.P . primary voters sent Trump to Washington to kill . But he can ’ t kill it , because what else does he have ? So now he has tried to join it , sort of . It ’ s a dreadful marriage for both sides , but divorce is impossible . That ’ s certainly not a type of predicament familiar to Trump . He ’ ll need something to kick . Bring in Reince .