( CNN ) President Donald Trump on Monday night backed away from his push for a vote on an Obamacare replacement until after the 2020 elections , bowing to the political reality that major health care legislation can not pass in the current Congress .
Trump 's statements come a week after his administration announced that it now agreed with a judge 's ruling that the entire Affordable Care Act should be scrapped . The opinion was a dramatic reversal from the administration 's previous stance that only portions of the act could not be defended .
Trump 's latest move allows him to wait on the issue as legal challenges against the health care law , also known as Obamacare , make their way through the federal court system . If it 's ultimately overturned , Trump can claim he made good on a campaign promise in time for his 2020 re-election campaign -- though he would then face the prospect of an estimated 20 million Americans losing their health insurance on his watch , with no Republican replacement in the legislative pipeline . If it 's upheld -- as it has been in previous Supreme Court challenges -- he can rail against a `` liberal '' court system .
`` The Republicans are developing a really great HealthCare Plan with far lower premiums ( cost ) & deductibles than ObamaCare . In other words it will be far less expensive & much more usable than ObamaCare . Vote will be taken right after the Election when Republicans hold the Senate & win back the House . It will be truly great HealthCare that will work for America , '' Trump declared in a series of tweets . `` Also , Republicans will always support Pre-Existing Conditions . The Republican Party will be known as the Party of Great HealtCare . Meantime , the USA is doing better than ever & is respected again ! ''
Trump unsettled Republican lawmakers last week by putting the spotlight back on the thorny issue of repealing and replacing Obamacare , vowing that his party would turn to replacing the health care law as his administration backed a federal court ruling striking down the law in its entirety . Republican congressional leaders quickly sought to distance themselves from Trump 's latest drive , mindful that passing such a proposal would be virtually impossible in a divided Congress .