The long years of Republican obstruction and obfuscation on health care reform have taken their toll . More than half of Americans still say they don ’ t know how they and their families will be affected by the Affordable Care Act , according to a new Kaiser Family Foundation poll , about the same percentage as in 2010 . More Americans have a negative view of the act than a positive one .
But now the Obama administration , which has been outshouted by its opponents , is fighting back . It recently announced it will pay $ 67 million to more than 100 community groups and health care providers to evangelize for the program and help people navigate its complexities in preparation for the opening of health care exchanges on Oct. 1 . President Obama , Vice President Joseph Biden Jr. and their spouses are preparing an extensive road trip in the next few weeks to encourage enrollment .
And on Wednesday , former President Bill Clinton — described by Mr. Obama as “ the secretary of explaining stuff ” — was deployed to give the first in a series of speeches describing the law ’ s importance to public health and to those now unable to obtain or afford insurance . Speaking at his library in Little Rock , Ark. , he made a forceful case :
“ This does give us the best chance we have to achieve nearly universal coverage , provide higher quality health care and lower the rate of cost increases , which we have got to do in a competitive global economy . ”
The public relations effort is desperately needed . The Republican Party has spent the last few months trying to dampen enthusiasm for enrollment with misinformation and opportunism . ( House Speaker John Boehner , for example , falsely claimed the law would raise the nation ’ s health care costs . ) The Senate minority leader , Mitch McConnell , has promised to make it the single biggest issue in next year ’ s midterm elections . One presidential hopeful , Senator Ted Cruz of Texas , spent his summer on a “ Defund Obamacare ” tour , cynically aware that it would be far more successful at bringing him name recognition and dollars than at achieving its purported goal .