With Senate Republicans struggling to come to a consensus on Trumpcare , the repeal and replacement for the Affordable Care Act , Sen. Ben Sasse ( R-NE ) made a radical , scorched earth proposal to popular vote loser Donald Trump , and of course Trump bit .
x If Republican Senators are unable to pass what they are working on now , they should immediately REPEAL , and then REPLACE at a later date ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) June 30 , 2017
Because it 's radical and extreme . Just totally repeal Obamacare , postponing implementation by a year , to give more time for coming up with a replacement .
`` On the current path , it looks like Republicans will either fail to pass any meaningful bill at all , or will instead pass a bill that attempts to prop up much of the crumbling ObamaCare structures . We can and must do better than either of these—both because the American people deserve better , and because we promised better , '' Sasse wrote in the letter . He asked Trump to call on Republicans to repeal Obamacare in early July if they can not reach an agreement on a comprehensive plan by then . `` We should include a year-long implementation delay to give comfort to Americans currently on ObamaCare that a replacement plan will be enacted before expiration , '' Sasse added . He then suggested Congress cancel its August recess to work on a replacement plan , passing that by Labor Day .
Which is so dumb on so many levels that of course Trump loves it . First , they ca n't come up with 50 votes now—it 's not going to happen by Labor Day . Second , it probably could n't be done under Senate rules—it would likely require 60 votes . Democrats are n't going to help with this . Third , it would not provide comfort to anyone—insurance companies would leave the exchanges in droves , knowing what we all know—they wo n't come up with a replacement plan , not by Labor Day , not in a year . They have n't managed to do it in seven years , not gon na happen in a few months or even a year .
And it would be a disaster . Because this is n't the first time the hare-brained scheme of repeal without replacement has come up , the Congressional Budget Office told us what would happen : 18 million people would lose insurance for 2018 , 32 million would lose it by 2026 . Premiums would increase by 20 percent to 25 percent ( compared to current law ) in the first year and would double—increase 100 percent—by 2026 . That 's under an analysis done for a bill that would have done repeal in phases , not all in one shebang like Sasse and Trump want to do . The analysis assumed a Medicaid phase-out . This would apparently just cut it off all at once . So the numbers could be much , much higher .
If you need more indication that this is a really dumb , dumb idea , Sen. Rand Paul ( R-KY ) is all over it , tweeting he 's spoken with both Trump and leadership to do it . Never mind that just a few months ago , in January , he said `` it 's imperative that Republicans do a replacement simultaneous with repeal . ''