Former President Bill Clinton said Tuesday President Obama should find a way to keep his oft-repeated promise to the American public that if those who liked their present health insurance plan could keep it under Mr. Obama ’ s new health care law .
“ I personally believe , even if it takes a change in the law , the president should honor the commitment that the federal government made to those people and let them keep what they got , ” Mr. Clinton said in an interview with Ozy Media founder Carlos Watson .
Mr. Obama is under fire for repeatedly saying people would not lose their existing plans under his signature law , only to walk back the pledge when millions of Americans received cancellation notices saying their coverage will not meet the Affordable Care Act ’ s minimum-coverage standards next year .
In the interview published Tuesday , Mr. Clinton said the country is “ better off with this law than without it , ” but there are three problems with its rollout .
First , online glitches suppressed the first several weeks of enrollment , an incident he compared it to the messy debut of the Medicare prescription benefit program under President George W. Bush .
Second , he noted that many governors have not opted to expand Medicaid to those making up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level . The federal government will fully pay for the newly eligible population through 2016 , so Mr. Clinton thinks more GOP governors will “ flip and start taking ” the money .
The former president said the cancellation notices round out the series of problems , and it may have an outsized effect on younger people , but “ not all young , ” who make above 400 percent of the federal poverty level and are not eligible for subsidies to offset their premiums if they buy new coverage on the Obamacare health exchanges .
White House press secretary Jay Carney said President Obama agrees with Mr. Clinton ’ s advice , although he stopped short of saying what specific steps the administration might take .
“ The answer is yes , the president ’ s tasked his team with looking at a range of options , ” Mr. Carney said . He said Mr. Obama has ordered his aides “ to look at ways to address that problem ” of people whose policies have been canceled .
Mr. Carney was careful to note that in a TV interview last week , Mr. Clinton said that “ we are better off with this law than without it. ” Mr. Obama apologized last week for people losing their insurance based on assurances he made .
Political groups with an eye toward the 2014 elections seized on Mr. Clinton ’ s remarks .
The conservative Club for Growth put out a statement asking if Sen. Mark Pryor , an Arkansas Democrat who faces a tough reelection battle next year , will support the Mr. Clinton ’ s call for Mr. Obama to consider potential changes to the law to help people keep their plans if they want .
“ Because of Obamacare , thousands of Arkansans have lost their health insurance , and premiums are doubling , ” club President Chris Chocula said . “ Mark Pryor needs to decide what he thinks is more important : the people of Arkansas or President Obama and his disastrous health care law . ”
“ I applaud President Clinton for joining the bipartisan call for President Obama to keep his promise to the American people , ” House Speaker John A. Bohner , Ohio Republican , said . “ These comments signify a growing recognition that Americans were misled when they were promised that they could keep their coverage under President Obama ’ s health care law . “
Mr. Boehner restated his commitment to scrapping the law , but said the parties ’ difference “ on that point ” should not stop “ reasonable Democrats from working with us to shield Americans from its most egregious consequences — like the millions of current health plans being canceled . ”
The Republican-led House is scheduled to vote Friday on the Keep Your Health Plan Act , a bill that would let Americans retain their existing health plans despite Obamacare ’ s new standards .