First , there was the delay of Obamacare ’ s Medicare cuts until after the election . Then there was the delay of the law ’ s employer mandate . Then there was the announcement , buried in the Federal Register , that the administration would delay enforcement of a number of key eligibility requirements for the law ’ s health insurance subsidies , relying on the “ honor system ” instead . Now comes word that another costly provision of the health law—its caps on out-of-pocket insurance costs—will be delayed for one more year .
Obamacare contains a blizzard of mandates and regulations that will make health insurance more costly . One of the most significant is its caps on out-of-pocket insurance costs , such as co-pays and deductibles . Section 2707 ( b ) of the Public Health Service Act , as added by Obamacare , requires that “ a group health plan and a health insurance issuer offering group or individual health insurance coverage may not establish lifetime limits on the dollar value of benefits for the any participant or beneficiary. ” Annual limits on cost-sharing are specified by Section 1302 ( c ) of the Affordable Care Act ; in addition , starting in 2014 , deductibles are limited to $ 2,000 per year for individual plans , and $ 4,000 per year for family plans .
We 've already seen the Obamacare administration put the breaks on the employer mandate until after the 2014 midterm elections while individuals continue to suffer with insurance loss , fewer working hours and uncertainty but now , Forbes is reporting the Obamacare cost caps will also be delayed for at least a year .
So why the delay ? Sure , caps on out of pocket costs sound great but insurance has to be paid for somehow . These cost caps result in skyrocketing premium costs , something Democrats ca n't afford going into the 2014 midterm elections . This is also another case of `` needing more time '' to set up the proper resources and tools to implement new rules properly .
These mandates have already had drastic effects on a number of colleges and universities , which offer inexpensive , defined-cap plans to their healthy , youthful students . Premiums at Lenoir-Rhyne University in Hickory , N.C. , for example , rose from $ 245 per student in 2011-2012 to between $ 2,507 in 2012-2013 . The University of Puget Sound paid $ 165 per student in 2011-2012 ; their rates rose to between $ 1,500 and $ 2,000 for 2012-2013 . Other schools have been forced to drop coverage because they could no longer afford it .
The reason for the delay ? “ Federal officials said that many insurers and employers needed more time to comply because they used separate companies to help administer major medical coverage and drug benefits , with separate limits on out-of-pocket costs . In many cases , the companies have separate computer systems that can not communicate with one another . ”
They have no choice . They ’ re already in on this . … Once you ’ ve passed it , once it ’ s yours , you own it , ” he said .
Democrats have already declared they are going to tout Obamacare as part of their re-election strategy in 2014 . Last night on Fox News , columnist Charles Krauthammer explained that although Democrats are trying to distance themselves from the consequences of Obamacare before 2014 through delays , there 's no way they can get around owning the legislation .