What exactly are we fighting over when it comes to health reform ? Is there really a fundamental philosophical difference between the parties ’ positions ? Does either party actually have a philosophy of American health care ?
On the one hand , the difference between the parties seems clear : the GOP plan is basically a tax cut for the rich that takes health care away from the poorest Americans and leaves the states holding the bag . But , as a matter of structure — as opposed to generosity — the GOP plan may differ from Obamacare a lot less than it looks ( setting aside the cruelty of its effects ) .
The House plan relies on government tax credits , regulation of the insurance industry , and continued government funding to keep the low-income population insured . In other words , it is a plan that relies on both government intervention and the private sector . And it walks a thin line between the idea that in a civilized society every person should have some health care and the opposite idea that you deserve only the health care you earn — and if you don ’ t earn enough , it ’ s okay if you suffer . In this respect , it is not that different from Obamacare .
This health reform debate , like virtually all the others that have come before it in this country , has failed to confront head-on the most important question in health . As a result , the end result will just be another Band-Aid . The fundamental question that every Congress from Truman ’ s to Trump ’ s has refused to answer is this : What is a health care system for ?
Democrats and Republicans alike have always been disjointed about the basic purpose of a health care system . Whether we are talking about Obamacare or Ryancare , there is no overarching theory that sets out the fundamental values of American health care .
If two people are dying from the same disease , and require the same operation to survive , and one can pay and one can not , is it okay for the poor person to die ? After talking ourselves hoarse about health reform in this country for nearly a century , we still have no definitive answer to this question , because the main players in the debate keep dodging it . President Trump himself has said : “ There was a philosophy in some circles that if you can ’ t pay for it , you don ’ t get it . That ’ s not going to happen with us. ” Well , it certainly will happen to a lot of people under the GOP plan — at least 10 million will be thrown off Medicaid according to the Congressional Budget office . But , it did also happen to some people under Obamacare — and happened to many , many more people before that .
The key to health care policy is finding a coherent balance between social solidarity and personal responsibility
There is a central tension in many policy debates — one with special salience in health care , given the life-and-death implications : the tension between social solidarity and personal responsibility ( terms popularized in the health-care context by Wendy Mariner of Boston University ) . That ’ s what Congress should be debating : whether health care falls into the category of goods that individuals should either acquire on their own or go without . Instead , all of our modern political health debates are about changes on the margins .
To be sure , they are really big margins , with tremendous human cost : Millions of people would be affected by the Republican cuts . But the fights are not about what we think a health care system should be . On that question , we continue to straddle the line , insisting on an inefficient and fragmented hodgepodge of public and private regulation of health care because we are not comfortable with either option . Worse , we hide this hodgepodge in programs generally invisible to public view — like the tax subsidy for employer provided health care — so we never have a debate on the real issues .
Part of the problem , believe it or not , is communism . Ronald Reagan , in his efforts to torpedo Medicare in the 1960s , proclaimed government support of health insurance “ socialized medicine , ” turning a big part of the health care debate into one about the American capitalist ethos and patriotism . ( Even before Reagan , the American Medical Association had been sounding this particular alarm ) . The resonance of Reagan ’ s message is an important reason why the United States is highly unlikely to ever have a single-payer system , such as a Medicare for everyone . It ’ s why we keep hearing the term “ liberty ” to — ironically — justify massive cuts that will have terrible effects on people ’ s lives .
To be sure , there are good-faith reasons to object to some socialized public policies , particularly the idea that relying on the market , rather than government , can lead to higher efficiency and better results . But we too seldom get to the point of analyzing whether that claim holds true in specific cases , because of the ideological baggage .
Since the 1940s , the US government has been deeply involved in health care , yet we pretend otherwise
The US government has played a far greater role in American health care , well before the ACA , than many people know or , in the case of pro-personal-responsibility conservatives , like to admit .
Many average , even rich , Americans may think that they get no federal aid in this area , but they probably do . They may disdain Medicaid — the low-income insurance program for the poor — but do they realize that approximately half of Americans get their insurance from private companies through work , and that system includes a substantial government “ handout ” too ? We call this the “ private payer ” system , and it feels like capitalism , not socialism . Since the 1940s , however , US employers have been incentivized to offer health insurance through a massive federal tax exemption for that benefit . Indeed , our current system was largely created by that policy . But the fact that the government involvement is concealed makes it palatable to our ethos .
( Although an GOP draft bill flirted with cutting back on that benefit even slightly , the absence of any cuts from the final version brought to the House makes clear just how much well-off Americans , and employers , like their health-care handout . )
On the other hand , we do not give the same help to everyone . Do all single males making $ 10,000 annually get health care from the government ? Most people think the answer is yes , through Medicaid . That ’ s wrong . Medicaid initially covered only mothers of dependent children , the disabled , and low-income elderly — the so-called deserving poor . While some states stepped up and voluntarily expanded their programs over time to include single adults , including men , many did not . As a matter of national health policy , in short , those adults were deemed undeserving of the community ’ s support until the ACA tried to cover them .
The Supreme Court stymied Obama on that front and made the ACA ’ s Medicaid expansion optional . So it was up to individual states to determine whether low-income single men deserved help . In states that answered that question with a “ No , ” we rely on charitable hospitals to pick up the slack for these uninsured — but the federal government makes special payments to those hospitals to compensate them . Which approach does that policy exemplify ? Socialism or capitalism ?
We are lying to ourselves when we refuse to acknowledge the role the federal government plays in all our health care . Kenneth Arrow , the Nobel Prize–winning economist who died last month , famously wrote of the impossibility of a true free market in health care , claiming : “ Nobody is prepared for the idea of a laissez-faire system , and we never really had one . ”
The result of philosophical confusion is a hodgepodge of policies
Look at all of our workarounds . We run our health insurance program for the poor through the states . We run our health insurance program for many workers though employers ( who get tax breaks from the government for their efforts ) . We say we do not want the federal government meddling with the practice of medicine , but we have built our entire health care system around health insurance access — and we let insurance shape what procedures doctors do , what drugs we use , and even what doctors many of us can see . We say we reject government-sponsored health care , yet the all-federally-run Medicare program is one of the most popular and successful health programs we have .
The House Republican Plan perpetuates this philosophical mess . It repeals the ACA ’ s requirement that we all buy insurance , but then reinserts a similar idea through the subtler requirement that we all need to maintain insurance coverage with no gaps if we want insurance access . In other words , the government will still interfere and ask the insurance industry to abandon the basic economic model under which insurers make money in a free market : discriminating in pricing based on health risk . Then it gives them subsidies to make up for the lost money . That ’ s a long , long way from a pure market system .
The plan cuts back on Medicaid , but instead compensating states for these cuts by funneling more money to the hospitals that are going to have to see all the poor uninsured people in those states . That ’ s still government-subsidized health care — just even more hidden , inefficient , and stingy than it was under the ACA .
To be fair , Obamacare perpetuated this confusion . The ACA bent over backward to keep the “ private ” insurance system in place . Indeed , it anchored the statute ’ s success on that private industry — something for which the ACA is now paying the price , as insurers defect . At the same time , the ACA regulated the insurance industry as never before , and went further than any other health program in American history to push the needle toward social solidarity in its open goal of universal access to care .
Really , Obama had no choice . Congress would never have allowed a full federal takeover of the health care system . ( Clinton ’ s plan made only modest moves in that direction , and it was a debacle . ) It just isn ’ t the American way of legislating to scrap decades of incrementally added state and federal programs and start afresh . In the case of health care , however , incrementalism has had a particularly pronounced and unfortunate effect : It has produced layers of health programs — from Medicare and Medicaid , to the HMO Act and ERISA of the 1970s , to HIPAA and EMTALA in the 1990s , to the ACA — all reflecting different theories of equality versus individual choice , and all operated in different ways .
Without a single philosophy of American health care , we have had to keep layering to try to get the regulation we all know we need for our people while also maintaining the fiction that we can have a successful and morally fair health care system without government centrally in the picture . We have run far too much of health care policy through the back door of the private insurance system . Advancing social solidarity — which it is clear all Americans want to some degree — is really the work of government , even in a system that may always have some private components .
And so we find ourselves here again . We are in a better starting place than we were in 2008 . The ACA ’ s greatest success lies in how much it tipped the scales in favor of social solidarity . No one is going to take health care away from all of the 20 million the ACA added . It is now the new normal to think , for example , that 26-year-olds should be insured and , in some states , that poor single men deserve health care , too . Even President Trump , as quoted above , embraced the new baseline Obama left behind , claiming everyone would be covered . And that baseline is a reason we have a healthy number of republican governors and senators now telling the House to slow down and rethink its thoughtless cuts . That ’ s a remarkable legacy for the ACA . It sounds a lot like solidarity .
The GOP plan will leave many people out , and will leave others with such skimpy financial assistance that the health care they have will be close to having nothing at all . That is the continuing tension between “ us versus me , ” and between government and the market , in American health care . It ’ s our enduring question and it ’ s clear that this round of health care reform , like all those before it , is not going to debate it openly and honestly .
Abbe Gluck is professor of law and faculty director of the Solomon Center for Health Law and Policy at Yale Law School .