Florida Governor Rick Scott was one of Obamacare ’ s earliest and most vociferous critics -- one of many reasons why conservatives are up in arms now that the Sunshine State will accept federal funds to expand its Medicaid program . In some ways , conservatives are justifiably apoplectic , but as Charles Krauthammer explained on ‘ Special Report ’ last night , the situation in Florida is more nuanced than meets the eye ( h/t NRO ) :
“ You can act honorably either way . You can oppose [ Obamacare and ] then say you lost the fight . It ’ s the law of the land . It passed through Congress and got the signature of the president . It was approved by the Supreme Court . And , when the president ran for reelection against somebody who would abolish it , the president wins … [ I ] think it ’ s honorable to say ‘ I will take the money because people in my state are paying federal taxes , are subsidizing people in other states , ’ or you could argue it the other way and say ‘ I still want to keep up the fight and that if enough states stay out , it ’ ll collapse . ’ ”
Let ’ s face it : Obamacare isn ’ t going anywhere -- at least anytime soon . Voters had an opportunity last November to elect a compelling candidate who promised to repeal the president ’ s health care law in full . They declined . Now , it seems , Governor Scott is merely adhering to one of President Kennedy ’ s old injunctions : Deal with the world as it is , not as you might want it to be . This reasoning is : Why should Governor Scott deny his constituents access to affordable health insurance -- especially now that Obamacare is likely on the books forever and the federal government will foot the bill one hundred percent ?
On the other hand , Florida ( and Scott himself ) led the charge to repeal Obamacare in state and federal court immediately after it was signed into law . But apparently standing on principle now doesn ’ t seem as important to Scott anymore ( even though he spent millions of dollars out of his own pocket to help overturn the law ) . Meanwhile , scores of other states with conservative chief executives have refused to participate in the program , including Louisiana , Texas , and Wisconsin , among others . Question : Despite Governor Scott ’ s heretofore impeccable conservative bona fides , is it really that hard to believe he would capitulate and reverse his position on the Medicaid expansion program now that he ’ s up for re-election in a purplish state with a notably high elderly voting population ? Hmm .