President Trump continued to express his dissatisfaction with Senate Republicans after their latest attempt to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act failed .
Interested in Donald Trump ? Add Donald Trump as an interest to stay up to date on the latest Donald Trump news , video , and analysis from ███ . Add Interest
In a series of tweets this morning , the president encouraged the Senate to change its rules to require just a 51-vote majority to pass future legislation .
If Republicans are going to pass great future legislation in the Senate , they must immediately go to a 51 vote majority , not senseless 60 ... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) July 28 , 2017
... Even though parts of healthcare could pass at 51 , some really good things need 60 . So many great future bills & budgets need 60 votes .... — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) July 28 , 2017
Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell previously signaled that he would not support changing the Senate rules .
`` There is an overwhelming majority on a bipartisan basis , not interested in changing the way the Senate operates on the legislative calendar . And , that will not happen , '' McConnell said at a press conference in May .
The suggestion from the president comes just hours after the Senate narrowly voted down the so-called `` skinny repeal '' version of the Republican health care bill .
The plan -- which would have repealed some parts of the Affordable Care Act , like the individual and employer mandates -- was voted down 51-49 early Friday morning .
Three Republican senators , John McCain of Arizona , Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Susan Collins of Maine , voted against the bill along with the entire Democratic caucus .
In the immediate aftermath of the bill 's defeat , the president reacted to the news by targeting those Republicans that voted against the bill .
3 Republicans and 48 Democrats let the American people down . As I said from the beginning , let ObamaCare implode , then deal . Watch ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) July 28 , 2017
McConnell admitted last night that Senate Republicans will likely have to move on to other legislative issues .
`` I regret that our efforts were simply not enough this time , '' McConnell said on the Senate floor .
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer said that Democrats are ready to work with Republicans on future health care legislation .
“ We can work together . Our country demands it , ” Schumer said . “ Let ’ s give it a shot . ”