ACA 's issues put the reputation of big progressivism at risk for at least this generation . Obamacare 's threat to liberalism
From the moment of his improbable emergence as a presidential contender seven years ago , Barack Obama has always positioned himself as something better than a politician . And he has always presented his goals for progressive change as something bigger than the bare minimum a Democrat might hope for in a country that skews center-right .
So the fiasco of the launch of Obama ’ s sweeping health care overhaul has put the reputation of Big Government progressivism at risk for at least this generation . And its future now rests on the president ’ s ability to reverse that debacle and to demonstrate that his approach to covering millions of uninsured Americans is not only an enlightened — but workable — policy . He set the bar himself .
In “ The Audacity of Hope , ” the best-selling 2006 manifesto that launched his presidential quest , Obama dismissed the achievements of the most recent Democratic president , Bill Clinton . “ In the first two years of his presidency , ” Obama wrote of Clinton , “ he would be forced to abandon some core elements of his platform — universal health care , aggressive investment in education and training — that might have more decisively reversed the long-term trends that were undermining the position of working families in the new economy. ” In the end , Obama sniffed , Clinton ’ s policies were “ recognizably progressive if modest in their goals . ”
Those words mean that much more is riding on the success or failure of Obama ’ s signature domestic policy than the fate of this president . Emboldened conservatives and worried liberals alike agree that the future of the Democratic Party ’ s plausible agenda , and of liberalism itself , is on the line .
Obama ’ s challenge is now nothing less than to assure that the cycle of progressivism he presumed to usher in , and the period of renewed faith and confidence in the transformative powers of government that he promised , does not die aborning . That will be no easy task .
“ Unlike the Republican agenda , the Democratic agenda does not work unless people have a certain level of trust in the competence of the government to act on their behalf , ” said William Galston , a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution , who 25 years ago helped launch the centrist “ New Democratic ” agenda that brought the Democrats back from years in the presidential wilderness . “ That is , if you will , the Democratic proposition . It ’ s not to say that the government should do everything , but it is to say there ’ s an indispensable — and not necessarily small — role for government at every level . ”
Conservative thinkers have already seized on the rocky rollout of Obamacare — and the indefensible management failures it implies — as proof positive that the age-old argument over the proper role of state action in American life has reached a fresh danger point for the Democrats .
“ At stake is the new , more ambitious , social-democratic brand of American liberalism introduced by Obama , of which Obamacare is both symbol and concrete achievement , ” wrote the columnist Charles Krauthammer . “ Its unraveling would catastrophically undermine their ideology of ever-expansive central government providing cradle-to-grave care for an ever-grateful citizenry . ”
Fouad Ajami of Stanford ’ s Hoover Institution wrote in The Wall Street Journal that “ a leader who set out to remake the health-care system in the country , a sixth of the national economy , on a razor-thin majority with no support whatsoever from the opposition party , misunderstood the nature of democratic politics . An election victory is the beginning of things , not the culmination . ”
And the conservative theorist Yuval Levin argued in National Review Online that Obama ’ s sudden decision last week to allow insurers to continue to offer private health plans that do not meet his new federal standards for comprehensive coverage — made in response to panic from congressional Democrats at the public outcry over cancelled policies — could gravely undermine the economic viability of the new health insurance market by allowing healthier people to opt out .
“ It suggests that the administration is giving up on the long game of doing what it takes to get the system into place , and then trusting that the public will come around , ” Levin wrote , “ and is adopting instead the mentality of a political war of attrition , fought news cycle by news cycle , in which the goal is to survive and gain some momentary advantage , rather than to achieve a larger and well-defined objective . ”
Anxious congressional Democrats face a fight-or-flight dilemma of their own . For all their worries , abandoning Obamacare is no easy proposition . They supported its creation and understand that their constituents need health care reform — they can not continue with the flawed old system that left so many shut out .
The White House , for its part , pooh-poohs such doomsday talk .
“ This is obviously a challenge , and we ’ re facing the challenge , and we ’ re up to the challenge , ” press secretary Jay Carney insisted on Friday .
But more dispassionate analysts — even sympathetic ones — say it would be hard to overstate the danger of this moment , for Obama and for Democrats more broadly . From the beginning , Obama sketched his agenda for the country as the sort that succeeds only once a generation , if then .