The left believes the lawsuit to be without merit and thinks the ACA should remain in place , but is divided on future healthcare policies .
“ Obamacare , the [ challengers ’ ] argument goes , is an intricately designed system . Lawmakers at the time of its passage believed that the law ’ s individual-mandate payment , a charge on those who went without health-care coverage , was a key piece of that system , compelling enough healthy people to buy into the insurance pool to keep its finances stable . Republicans zeroed out the payment in their 2017 tax-cut law , which , the challengers argue for complex but unpersuasive reasons , rendered the mandate unconstitutional . And , without the mandate , the system can not work as its drafters anticipated , so the whole law must go…
“ Yet Congress made a different call when it zeroed out the mandate payment in 2017… For the 5th Circuit to rule that Obamacare could not function as designed without the mandate — despite the fact that congressional intentions , as of 2017 , were to have it function without the mandate — would require the appellate judges to replace their policy judgment for that of the policymakers in Congress , in effect to usurp the legislative function . ”
“ It ’ s clear that the Trump administration and some supposedly conservative judges are doing exactly what they so often accuse liberal judges of doing : Pretending that they are legislators . ”
“ It ’ s not just that 21 million people would probably lose health insurance , or that 133 million Americans with pre-existing conditions would lose their protection… health plans could also begin limiting the total amount of financial protection they offer customers , increasing deductibles , charging higher prices to older customers , and dropping expensive categories of benefits , like prescription drugs . ”
Many argue that “ despite relentless Republican attacks , the benefits provided [ by the ACA ] -- guaranteed insurance and coverage of pre-existing conditions -- are now seen by many as a benefit to which they 're entitled . Moving to Medicare for those who want it is a logical next step toward a single-payer option , one that maintains choice for millions of Americans… 56 % of Americans say they support full Medicare for All… [ but ] when voters are presented with the full details of the Sanders and Warren plans , support falls dramatically… I believe it 's critical for Democrats to maintain their advantage on health care going into 2020 , and the best way to do that is to reject Medicare for All and embrace Medicare for those who want it . ”
Others counter that “ those who lean to the left are repeatedly castigated for embracing Medicare-for-all minus a detailed and specific outline for how it will be paid for , while Republicans are rarely challenged on how repealing the ACA will weaken the entire American health-care system as we know it . At the same time , many believe the Republicans are fighting the ACA as a show for their rabid base , and aren ’ t serious about taking it out . As a result , all too many can ’ t bring themselves to accept that Republicans might be for real , that they want to destroy the ACA , and they don ’ t much care about what happens [ to ] individual Americans or the entire health-care system…
“ It would be one of the great ironies of all time if it were Donald Trump and the Republican Party who all but forced people to turn to the ‘ socialist ’ Medicare system to save health care . But it ’ s an irony that ’ s increasingly not outside the realm of possibility . ”
“ Trump ’ s defenders will say this evidence is all circumstantial . But circumstantial evidence is not weak evidence : it ’ s simply evidence based on the circumstances in which an act of wrongdoing is committed — such as the license plate of a car that speeds away from a bank just after that bank is robbed . Criminals are convicted on such evidence all the time . They will also say that there ’ s no explicit quid pro quo proposal here . But… ‘ even when a corrupt deal is struck implicitly , the government can still prosecute extortion on a quid pro quo basis . Circumstantial evidence can be enough to prove a criminal exchange. ’ … ‍ “ In the absence of an explicit quid pro quo over restarting aid , the context and circumstances are what will become the focus of the investigation . There is enough here to support impeachment . Whether it is also enough to convince Republicans and lead to removal is another matter . ”