The website repair gives Democrats a badly needed psychological boost . Obamacare troubles remain
For House Democratic Caucus Chairman Xavier Becerra , the new , improved Obamacare website is better than it was — but the law won ’ t be a success “ until every American who has a chance to qualify for these health insurance policies gets it . ”
For Jeremy Milarsky , who works for one of the “ navigator ” groups in Missouri that ’ s helping people sign up , the website is improved enough to make the job easier , mainly because of a new health plan browser feature that actually works .
But for health insurers across the country , the new HealthCare.gov isn ’ t even close to a success — and won ’ t be until the Obama administration finishes the critical parts that aren ’ t even built yet .
The fixes to the federal Obamacare enrollment website are holding up well enough — so far — that they mark a small but crucially important milestone in the rollout of President Barack Obama ’ s signature health care law . For the first time since October , Democrats are ready to go on the offensive again , and advocates of the law are ready to start inviting people back . And Republicans are saying , hey , it was never all about the website anyway .
But the administration ’ s seeming success in bringing the website up to a basic level of competency is nowhere close to the kind of turnaround that would reboot the whole conversation — or make anyone ready to declare the Affordable Care Act a success .
Whole sections of the “ back end ” of the website , the part insurers deal with , remain unfinished . Democrats are now questioning the Obama administration about how it ’ s fixing the faulty enrollment records the website has been spitting out , to make sure people don ’ t find out they can ’ t use their new insurance after all .
And there are so many other real and potential problems — canceled policies , “ sticker shock ” and the possibility that people in certain situations won ’ t be able to keep their doctors — that Republicans have lots of ways to change the subject and keep the attacks coming .
The website repair won ’ t erase two months of lost time on the rollout . But it ’ s a big enough deal to give Democrats and other Obamacare supporters a badly needed psychological boost that two weeks ago seemed a longshot — and for many of them , that ’ s good enough .
“ I think it ’ s doing better , and that ’ s significant . But that doesn ’ t mean you can declare it a success , ” said Rep. Diana DeGette ( D-Colo. ) . “ I just don ’ t think you can say it ’ s a success or a failure based on one day or event . It ’ s a moving target . ”
The White House has been more mixed in its definitions of success . Obama sounded bullish at times when he hit the campaign trail for the law again on Tuesday . “ The bottom line is this law is working and will work into the future , ” he said , as he reminded his audience of popular benefits like coverage of pre-existing conditions , free preventive care and the end of lifetime limits on health benefits .
But he was also cautious about declaring the website totally fixed . “ We ’ ve learned not to make wild promises about how perfectly smooth it ’ s going to be at all times , ” Obama said . But he vowed that “ we ’ re going to keep on working to fix whatever problems come up in any startup ” — and he was confident enough to declare to Republicans that “ we ’ re not going back . ”
One of the most immediate problems the administration has to fix is the parts of the website that don ’ t even exist yet . The administration still has to build three critical “ back end ” pieces that insurers need . One is the part that handles “ reconciliation , ” where insurers double-check who ’ s enrolled in which health plans at what prices . That ’ s especially important , since some insurers say they ’ re not certain they ’ re getting the records of everyone who has enrolled .
The other pieces are the payment system that will pay the federal Obamacare subsidies to the insurers — due in late January for everyone who has enrolled by mid-December — and the parts that will compensate insurers that attract too many sick people .
To health insurers , whose cooperation the Obama administration needs to get people covered , the repair effort won ’ t be a success until all of those pieces are in place .
“ In addition to addressing the ongoing problems with the enrollment files , other ‘ back end ’ functions , such as reconciliation and the processing of subsidy payments , need to be working to ensure the new marketplace is stable and consumers ’ coverage is not disrupted , ” said Robert Zirkelbach , a spokesman for America ’ s Health Insurance Plans , the main trade group for health insurance companies .
Julie Bataille , a spokeswoman for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services , which is implementing the law , told reporters Tuesday that the administration is “ working to make sure with the fixes in place that we ’ ve addressed the most significant back-end issues and that we will work with [ health insurers ] so that we get accurate , timely enrollment information for them and for consumers . ”
Still , for a website that had a rollout as disastrous as HealthCare.gov — the federal health insurance exchange that serves 36 states — it was a small victory for the administration that the site hasn ’ t crashed since the relaunch .
People did experience delays and “ please wait ” messages on Monday , when a million visitors checked out the site and some got placed in a new cyber-holding queue . But the site didn ’ t go down , and it ran more smoothly on Tuesday .