Debbie Wasserman Schultz has said Democrats will run on the Affordable Care Act . | AP Photo Dems worry their leaders are in denial
Democratic leaders claim the bungled launch of Obamacare is just the latest news sensation — a media-stirred tempest that looks in the heat of the moment like it could upend the midterm election , but ends up fizzling well before voters head to the polls .
And that perceived gap between party spin and facts on the ground is fueling worries that the White House and Democratic higher-ups aren ’ t taking the possible electoral blowback seriously enough or doing enough to shield their candidates . Democratic contenders in the toughest races are distinctly less convinced that Obamacare will fade as an election-year issue — and they can ’ t afford to just cross their fingers that things get ironed out or that Republicans revert to political hara-kiri .
House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi ( D-Calif. ) said at a forum hosted by BuzzFeed recently that the rollout won ’ t “ hurt us in 2014 , ” adding that “ we ’ re proud ” of the law . Democratic National Committee Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz , in a recent appearance on CNN , went so far as to assert that Obamacare would be “ an advantage ” for Democratic candidates next year .
“ Democrats will run on the Affordable Care Act and win , ” she has also told reporters .
The White House , meanwhile , has come across as equally dismissive of Obamacare ’ s consequences for 2014 .
“ The fact is that [ the president ] is focused on delivering the access to quality and affordable health insurance to the American people that the Affordable Care Act promises . He ’ s not concerned about the politics of that , ” White House press secretary Jay Carney recently said .
Polls , however , suggest Democrats should be worried . A CBS News poll released Wednesday showed Obama with a 37 percent approval rating , his lowest figure ever in that survey . Another all-time low in the poll : approval of Obamacare , which stood at 31 percent .
Republicans are placing their chips on Obamacare as their defining 2014 issue and putting their money where their mouths are . The Koch brothers-funded Americans for Prosperity has launched a $ 4 million TV ad offensive targeting House and Senate Democrats on the health care law . As much as they might be tempted , those on the receiving end can ’ t easily flee from the law because many or most of them voted for it .
“ We ’ re trying to deny what everyone knows is happening , ” said one Democratic pollster who is a veteran of competitive congressional races . “ Anybody who is halfway intelligent knows this is a big … problem for us . It ’ s impossible not to see . We can try to hide our heads in the sand and pretend it ’ s not a problem , but it is . ”
“ I think if you ’ re the leaders of the party you have to keep a positive message as long as possible , ” he said .
In a way it ’ s understandable that Democratic leaders like Pelosi and Wasserman Schultz would give no ground on Obamacare . They ‘ re loyal to the president , who regards the health care bill as his singular achievement . The 73-year-old Pelosi , who as House speaker played a starring role in getting the law through Congress , has her legacy to think about . And then there are the natural forces of politics at play : When party faithful are attacked by the enemy , they dig in .
In the day and age of the 24/7 news cycle , almost every big story in Washington is viewed through the lens of elections — whether it really has the ability to move votes or not . A hot news story that seems in the moment as though it could upend the midterm — the NSA wiretapping scandal , the IRS targeting imbroglio , the Syria bombing campaign that wasn ’ t , and the Obama administration “ war on coal , ” to name a few this year — often appears in hindsight as a quick detour on the journey to Election Day .
To many worried Democrats , however , there ’ s a sense that the botched Obamacare rollout might really be different .
For one , there are the all-too-fresh memories of the last midterm , when Republicans exploited anger and anxiety about the just-passed ACA to score a historic , 63-seat gain in the House . There are the poll numbers , with survey after survey showing Obama ’ s popularity cratering . The RealClearPolitics ’ polling average since Nov. 6 shows Obama ’ s approval at just above 40 percent .