That 's the headline from the Washington Post 's signature political blog , 'The Fix . ' It 's referring to the steadily deteriorating polling position of President Obama 's signature `` accomplishment , '' in advance of the Supreme Court 's hotly-anticipated verdict on its constitutionality . Here is WaPo 's chart of its own Obamacare survey data over the last three years :
As you can see , opposition has consistenly outstripped support , but the anti-Obamacare position is pulling away . Contrary to Democrats ' smug predictions , their law has become less popular as time wears on -- despite the fact that they designed the legislation to be front-loaded with popular provisions . A fresh poll from the Associated Press confirms this trend , demonstrating abysmally low support for Obamacare overall , and among independents :
Just a third of Americans back President Barack Obama 's health care overhaul on which the Supreme Court is about to pass judgment , a new poll finds . But there is overwhelming support among both supporters and opponents for Congress and the president to begin work on a new bill if the high court strikes down the two-year-old law . The overall level of support for the law is relatively unchanged in recent months , with 47 percent opposing it . But an Associated Press-GfK poll shows that only 21 percent of independents approve of the law , a new low in AP-GfK polling .
But remember , the liberal establishment is warning us that the High Court could lose all credibility if it throws out all or most of a law that most Americans happen to despise . Meanwhile , with new economic indicators looking grim , Mitt Romney must remind voters that President Obama used his giant Democrat majority to pursue this unwanted healthcare law at the expense of jobs and the economy . Terrible policy , terrible priorities , terrible politics . Make them pay .
UPDATE - Avik Roy has more on Mitt Romney 's plan to replace Obamacare , if and when the opportunity arises . James Capretta argues that conservatives should be equipped with proactive solutions on this front , regardless of how SCOTUS rules next week .