The House on Thursday backed a bill that would require the Obama administration to report weekly on how many Americans have signed up for healthcare coverage as Republicans maintain an election-year spotlight on the troubled law .
The vote was 259-154 , with 33 Democrats breaking ranks and joining the GOP majority in supporting the legislation . It marked the second time in a week — and certainly not the last — that the House has targeted President Barack Obama 's law , with Republicans confident that Americans ' unease with the overhaul will produce major GOP wins in the November elections .
Some of the most vulnerable Democrats facing re-election this fall from Arizona , Georgia , New York and Florida voted for the bill . Last week , 67 Democrats bucked the administration and backed a bill to bolt new security requirements on the law .
The bill would require the administration to report weekly on the number of visits to the government healthcare website , the number of Americans who applied and the number of enrollees by ZIP code , as well as other statistics . It stands no chance in the Democratic-led Senate .
The administration has reported monthly on enrollment , announcing last week that 2.2 million signed up through the end of December and nearly 4 million had been deemed eligible for Medicaid .
`` We know the president 's healthcare law is driving up costs for middle-class families , making it harder for small businesses to hire , and hurting the economy , but there 's still a lot we do n't know , '' said House Speaker John Boehner , R-Ohio , contending that the administration `` has n't provided a clear picture of where enrollment stands . ''
Rep. Fred Upton , the Michigan Republican who chairs the House Energy and Commerce Committee , recalled in a statement that , `` remember , this is the administration that knew millions of Americans would receive cancellation notices , but they only acted to allow people to keep their healthcare plans that they had and liked after we forced their hand back a few months ago .
`` Perhaps by acting today , we can again force them to do the right thing and share basic information with policymakers and the public about how the law is working or not . ''
The legislation was introduced by Rep. Lee Terry , R-NE , and cosponsored by Rep. Marsha Blackburn , R-Tenn. , both of whom sit on the panel .
`` This should be easy , '' Terry said in a statement . `` But what we ’ re talking about here today is basic transparency so we all have the data to assess what ’ s working and what ’ s not .
`` This bill is a mechanism for accountability so we can get the answers that both Democrats and Republicans and state insurance commissioners and governors need to know in order to understand what ’ s working and what ’ s not . ''
Blackburn , the committee 's vice chairman , said in her statement that `` none of the information being shared by the administration regarding enrollment means much of anything . We talk about people that enrolled , but we do n't know how many people have paid and how many people have completed that process .
`` What are the demographics of the individuals that are enrolling ? '' Blackburn asked . `` All of this is information that the individual that is paying for this , the American taxpayer , deserves to know . Who has paid for this insurance ? ''
But Democrats countered that the Republicans were adding onerous requests and disrupting administration efforts to sign up millions of Americans for healthcare coverage .
`` This is just an attempt to pile on so many requirements on the administration , '' said Rep. Frank Pallone , D-N.J. , who pointed to recent administration reports . He said the data disclosed is consistent with what the government releases monthly on Medicare .
Obama has said his administration is the most transparent in history , and Republicans tossed those words back at him .
`` This bill is fundamentally about transparency , '' said Rep. Joe Pitts , R-Pa. , who insisted that the American people have a right to an accurate assessment of the law 's data .
The administration opposes the measure , saying it has been providing information on enrollments and the added requirements would force it to hire new staff as government expense .
Democratic Rep. John Sarbanes , D-Md. , said the measure was `` really designed to harass the Health and Human Services '' Department .
The goal of the Affordable Care Act is to expand coverage to tens of millions of Americans who lack insurance , to lower healthcare costs , to increase access to preventive services and to eliminate some of the pre-existing condition requirements that insurance companies have used to deny coverage .
The main Obamacare website , HealthCare.gov , got off to a calamitous start on Oct. 1 , followed quickly by widespread reports of canceled policies and higher premiums .
Republicans who steadfastly opposed the law have led the charge in the House , which voted more than 40 times last year to repeal , replace or undo parts of the law . The GOP campaigned last year on a promise to repeal and replace the law , but the party has n't offered an alternative . ”