President Obama ’ s decision this week to delay the employer mandate to provide health insurance is the latest tweak to his health law , and it underscores just how much of the bill remains in flux more than three years after he signed it into law .
The courts have rewritten the way the Medicaid expansion works , while Mr. Obama and Congress together have repealed a budget-busting long-term care program and onerous reporting requirements for businesses .
Then on Tuesday Mr. Obama took unilateral action to postpone the employer mandate for a year , with his aides saying they are trying to show the kind of flexibility all sides have asked for as the massive bill lurches toward full implementation .
The fits and starts have left an ever-shifting platform that could be even more complicated by the time the law ’ s most controversial aspect — the individual mandate to have health insurance or pay a fine/tax — goes into effect Jan. 1 .
“ There will be certainly opportunities here for further confusing people , ” Timothy Jost , a professor at the Washington and Lee University School of Law , said of recent attempts to attack the law .
All sides had predicted the law , officially known as the Affordable Care Act and widely nicknamed “ Obamacare , ” would change over time , and even Mr. Obama and congressional Democrats had said they ’ d be open to tweaks that might make it work better .
SEE ALSO : PRUDEN : Obamacare called ‘ The fiasco for the ages ’
Still , observers were caught off guard by the White House ’ s sudden decision to delay the employer mandate by one year , to 2015 . The provision requires businesses with more than 50 workers to offer insurance to all full-time employees , or else pay a fine of $ 2,000 per worker .
Opponents of the law said the move exposed its fundamental flaws .
“ Implementation of the ACA has not lowered costs or increased access as promised , ” Sen. Jerry Moran , Kansas Republican , said this week . “ Individuals , families and employers still face increasing health insurance costs , new taxes overseen by what we have recently learned is a politically-biased IRS , burdensome mandates , and massive uncertainty because of this flawed law . ”
Republicans have repeatedly tried to repeal the law , or at least chip away at it , while Democrats say unfounded criticism and a lack of funding has undermined the administration ’ s efforts after years of work .
“ The problem all along has been that while the program was passed with great fanfare a few years ago , most of the policies that will really impact people won ’ t take effect until 2014 , ” said Jim Manley , a Democratic strategist and former spokesman for Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid . “ Which is a tough way to sell something to the American people , especially when the Republicans are doing everything they can to undermine a bill that is the law of the land . ”
Mr. Jost also said “ widespread , vicious opposition to this law ” has been the prime source of turbulence along the path to implementation .
“ It ’ s like if you ’ re trying to get your work done , and somebody ’ s slapping you in the face all the time , ” he said .
The choices Congress made in writing the law have contributed to the complexity of getting it up and running .
Congress did not employ a single-payer system that would have given the federal government complete control , and in an attempt to give states some flexibility it offered them the chance to set up their own health insurance marketplaces , or exchanges . But more than half of the states decided to let the federal government create one for them , creating a hodgepodge of state-run and federally facilitated marketplaces .
The Supreme Court added to the complexity last year when it upheld the core of the law but said states should be allowed to opt out of the Medicaid expansion . Some statehouses are still grappling with whether to accept the opt-out .
Meanwhile , on Capitol Hill , lawmakers have gone back and recaptured some of the money the law would have overpaid as tax credits for those using subsidies to buy insurance on the exchanges .
And all sides agreed in 2011 to repeal a business expense reporting requirement that had been designed so the IRS could make sure employers were paying their full tax burdens .
This week ’ s decision signaled that more tweaks and changes may be on the way .
“ These things have never been that easy , ” Mr. Jost said . “ I just think it ’ s so unfortunate that it ’ s turned out this way . ”