The most noteworthy thing about the House Republican leadership ’ s new American Health Care Act is that a lot of Republicans appear to be unhappy with it .
It leaves in place some of Obamacare ’ s most destructive provisions . For instance , the reform allows children to stay on their parents ’ plans until 26 , and requires private plans to cover certain essential benefits . But the bill also takes several steps toward creating a market-based health care system capable of expanding access to quality , affordable care .
Several parts of the American Health Care Act deserve applause . For instance , the bill would immediately end the individual mandate requiring Americans to purchase coverage or else pay a tax penalty of $ 695 or 2.5 % of income—whichever is greater . It would also scrap the mandate requiring employers with 50 or more full-time workers to offer coverage .
By bolstering Health Savings Accounts , the measure would empower Americans to spend more of their health care dollars as they see fit . HSAs allow individuals to put aside money , tax-free , to cover out-of-pocket medical expenses . Starting next year , the act would increase the maximum individual HSA contribution from $ 3,400 to $ 6,550 , and the top family contribution from $ 6,750 to $ 13,000 .
The bill would also roll back Obamacare ’ s complex system of income-based insurance subsidies and replace them with more straightforward , age-based , refundable tax credits . An individual who does not get coverage through work or another public program would receive the credit once a month to help cover premiums for any health insurance policy he chooses—not just those available on Obamacare ’ s exchanges .
The new credits would increase by $ 500 for each decade of age—from $ 2,000 annually for Americans under 30 , to $ 3,000 for those between 40 and 50 , to $ 4,000 for those 60 and older . If a person selects a policy that costs less than his credit , he could deposit the remainder in an HSA .
The credits aren ’ t perfect . They ’ d decrease by $ 100 for every $ 1,000 of income above $ 75,000 for individuals and above $ 150,000 for families . Not only is this scheme overly complicated—it ’ ll require the IRS to verify people ’ s incomes in order to determine eligibility . That ’ s barely an improvement over the Obamacare status quo .
The GOP bill would help to drive down premiums and deductibles for the young by loosening its “ community rating ” rules . Obamacare prohibited insurers from charging older patients more than three times what they charged younger ones ; the American Health Care Act would increase that ratio to 5:1 .
In so doing , the bill would end an unfair arrangement that shifts insurance costs from older , sicker Americans to younger , healthier ones . Older Americans may see their premiums rise , but they ’ d also receive more generous tax credits than younger people . And by attracting more young people into the insurance pool , this reform would stabilize the adverse-selection “ death spiral ” plaguing Obamacare ’ s exchanges .
The act would further bring down premiums by repealing Obamacare ’ s many taxes , including its multibillion-dollar levies on health insurers , medical device manufacturers , and pharmaceuticals—which have been passed onto consumers for years .
However , the American Health Care Act is also a far cry from full-scale repeal and replacement of Obamacare . It would preserve many of Obamacare ’ s “ essential health benefits , ” like free coverage of preventive care and addiction treatment . Each of these mandates increases the cost of a policy . These mandates also undermine consumer choice ; surely , some people would forego coverage of certain “ essential ” benefits in exchange for lower premiums .
The act also maintains the unlimited tax exclusion for employer-sponsored health plans . This tax break essentially subsidizes employer-based coverage by excluding the value of health benefits from employees ’ taxable income .
Since those purchasing coverage in the individual market enjoy no such tax break , the policy has helped entrench a system in which coverage is tied to employment . And it ’ s contributed to the runaway growth of health costs . After all , a dollar of taxed wages is worth less than a dollar of untaxed health benefits . Americans have put those generous health benefits to use , driving up demand for health care and thus its price .
The GOP bill would also preserve Obamacare ’ s expansion of Medicaid to childless adults making up to 138 % of the poverty level until the end of 2019 . Thereafter , anyone who was in the program thanks to Obamacare ’ s expansion of eligibility could stay in .
The only saving grace for the bill ’ s treatment of Medicaid is that it begins to transform the program ’ s funding formula from an open-ended federal commitment into a “ per capita allotment ” system , wherein states receive a set amount of federal funding for each Medicaid enrollee .
This reform would put significant pressure on states to rein in Medicaid ’ s out-of-control costs—instead of rewarding them for spending increases , as the current system does . And it would give states the flexibility to manage their programs in order to meet the unique needs of their populations .
Unfortunately , that per-capita allotment will be based on the Obamacare era ’ s artificially high levels of Medicaid spending .
Since its release Monday evening , the bill has taken a beating—from Republicans . But the members of the GOP , moderates and conservatives alike , have to remember that a repeal-and-replace effort that devolves into infighting will just leave Obamacare in place .
The American Health Care Act is Republicans ’ imperfect first crack at a replacement plan . It won ’ t be their last .
Sally C. Pipes is president , CEO , and Thomas W. Smith Fellow in Health Care Policy at the Pacific Research Institute . Her latest book is The Way Out of Obamacare ( Encounter 2016 ) .