The local strategy is unusually aggressive , even for a president on the ropes . | REUTERS Local media targeted on Obamacare
President Barack Obama has bungled HealthCare.gov so badly that he ’ s told senior aides to not even try to win positive coverage from the national press .
In the past month , Obama and his Cabinet have hit nine of the top 10 cities with the highest concentration of the uninsured , while senior administration officials have held almost daily reporter conference calls in nearly a dozen states to challenge Republican governors who refuse to expand Medicaid .
Obama ’ s political arm , Organizing for Action , is taking a similar approach , holding protests — some attended by only a dozen or so people — that win coverage on the local pages of the nation ’ s small-town newspapers .
The local strategy is unusually aggressive , even for a president on the ropes and desperate to circumvent the national media . It ’ s been the only way to break through the glut of bad headlines and go on the offense to make the law work — although even when the White House showers attention on small markets , the results can be mixed .
The effort mirrors how Obama ’ s presidential campaigns operated . Pay special attention to local press because that ’ s where far more people who Obama wants to target get their news .
Josh Earnest , the principal deputy White House press secretary , got top billing in front page stories last week in The Times and Democrat of Orangeburg , S.C. , The Post and Courier of Charleston , S.C. , and the Portland Press Herald in Maine — offering the same talking points that the administration repeats daily in Washington without much notice .
And while the White House briefing room is dominated by national news outlets , just behind the door where the communications staff works is a wall covered with reproductions of front pages of local newspapers . Stories about Obama ’ s initiatives are outlined with yellow highlighter .
Obama , thin-skinned about media coverage of his presidency and often frustrated by the White House press corps , knows a few favorable local headlines is as good as it gets these days . He made a rare public admission during his Nov. 14 press conference that his aides found strikingly candid for the image-conscious president : The media have been justifiably hard on him .
“ Right now , everybody is properly focused on us not doing a good job on the rollout , and that ’ s legitimate and I get it , ” Obama said , repeating a sentiment he ’ s delivered privately to top aides . “ There have been times where I thought we were kind of slapped around a little bit unjustly . This one is deserved . Right ? It ’ s on us . ”
The centerpiece of the local strategy is the White House ’ s campaign against Republican governors or legislatures in 24 states that have declined to accept federal money to open up Medicaid to 5.4 million people . With a faulty website , the White House has lost much of the high ground to push back on Obamacare attacks over the past two months , but the one exception is the GOP resistance to expand Medicaid access , said a senior administration official .
Republicans have made a big deal of the canceled policies on the individual market , the official said , but the GOP is responsible for leaving millions of Americans in limbo . This population earns too much to sign up for Medicaid and too little to qualify for tax subsidies to purchase private insurance in the exchanges .
On the local media calls , administration officials quantify the impact state by state . In Nebraska , for example , the White House targeted Republican Gov . Dave Heineman , saying his refusal to expand Medicaid leaves 48,000 residents without access to affordable coverage .
“ They can score short-term political points by attacking the Affordable Care Act and blocking Medicaid expansion , ” Earnest told Nebraska media last week . “ Or on the other hand , they can actually save taxpayer dollars and ensure that thousands of their residents … would have access to quality , affordable health care . ”
The Omaha World-Herald put the story on A6 under the headline : “ Nebraska takes heat for not expanding Medicaid . ”
But flip to the front of the business page in the same edition , and the news is less favorable for the White House : “ Midlands employers expect jump in 2014 health costs. ” The story details how Nebraska and Iowa employers are bracing for benefit cost increases that exceed the national average , due in part to the Affordable Care Act , according to the survey of employers .
The Times and Democrat of Orangeburg , S.C. , stripped two stories across its front page last week — one was about canceled insurance policies , but the other focused on the White House demanding Republican Gov . Nikki Haley to open up Medicaid .