The race to stop ObamaCare before Americans can officially sign up this fall for the government-backed health insurance intensified Sunday with two of the movement ’ s biggest champions confident they will succeed but acknowledging it will take a “ tsunami ” of support .
Texas Republican Sen. Ted Cruz , a Tea Party-backed lawmaker at the center of the effort to “ defund ” ObamaCare , said the fight will play out in the weeks before the Oct. 1 signup date and that success will require a grass-roots effort in which Americans across the country must “ demand ” their elected officials “ do the right thing . ”
“ This fight is likely to heat up in the month of September , ” Cruz told CNN ’ s “ State of the Union . '' “ That 's going to be when the battle is engaged . ”
Cruz is joining Heritage Action for America , the advocacy arm of the conservative Heritage Foundation think tank , to get lawmakers after they return to Capitol Hill next week to separate out ObamaCare from a temporary spending bill to keep the federal government running , then vote in favor of the spending bill to avoid a politically unpopular government shutdown .
However , he acknowledges Republicans still don ’ t have the support on Capitol Hill -- 41 members in the Senate or 218 in the House .
“ We do not have the votes right now , ” Cruz said . “ But I believe if we see a grass-roots tsunami , that is going to cause Republicans and Democrats to listen to the people . … It is going to take a tsunami and I 'm going to do everything I can to encourage that tsunami . ''
It will also take President Obama agreeing to defund his signature health reform law , which Cruz still thinks could happen .
Cruz , who joined the Heritage Action ’ s Defund ObamaCare Town Hall Tour last week in Dallas , repeated the argument that the law is a jobs killer because of the financial burden it puts on businesses .
And he proposes a multi-pronged reform of the country ’ s health-care system that includes allowing Americans to purchase health insurance from any state and expanding health savings accounts “ to make it easier in a tax-advantage way to take care of prevention and routine medical needs . ”
Cruz , who appears to be interested in a 2016 presidential run , was joined on the show by Democratic politician and medical doctor Howard Dean , who seems to have publicly re-emerged ahead of the 2016 presidential elections .
Dean , a former Vermont governor and 2004 Democratic presidential candidate , called Cruz “ a slick spokesman . ”
“ God help us if he gets to be anything more than the senator from Texas , ” Dean added .
Former South Carolina Republican Sen. Jim DeMint , who left Congress this year to become president of the Heritage Foundation , told CNN that ObamaCare was passed under false pretenses , in light of recent revelations about costs and requirements .
“ American people were lied to , and they have every right to demand that their representatives stop this unfair and un-American law , ” he said .