Judgment Day has finally arrived in Washington for President Obama and his health care law , which after two long years of court battles will earn a final legal decision Thursday from the nine justices on the Supreme Court .
At stake is the chief domestic accomplishment of Mr. Obama ’ s term in office — a plan to extend coverage to millions of uninsured Americans — and the court ’ s verdict will determine the limits of government powers in a 21st-century economy .
The White House , members of Congress , health care stakeholders and activists on both sides spent Wednesday refining their talking points , lining up legal professionals to offer rapid-fire analysis the instant the court releases its decision , and putting the final touches on a slew of news conferences , conference calls and tweets they have scheduled in the aftermath .
In the world of Washington , it ’ s the most momentous day in years .
“ In one sense , this is just a decision , ” said Neil Trautwein , vice president of the National Retail Federation , a group that opposes the law . “ In another sense , it ’ s a collision of the three branches of government , so it ’ s high theater . ”
Anticipation has been building for a month as the clock ticked down to the end of the Supreme Court ’ s 2011-12 session . The justices even extended their scheduled time in Washington through Thursday , so the decision is announced on the last day possible .
The chief question before the court is whether it will strike down the law ’ s individual mandate compelling most Americans to have health insurance . But the justices face other complex questions if they strike it down , including how much of the rest of the law can survive without its centerpiece . They also will decide whether states can refuse to massively expand their Medicaid programs without losing all federal funding .
Expected to be released midmorning , the ruling could be enormously complex , as many of the justices are expected to write their own opinions in a case expected to set the tone for federal power this century .
If the court upholds the law , congressional Republicans will be back to square one in their crusade to wipe out the entire thing . If the court strikes the mandate but upholds the rest of the law , health insurance premiums likely will skyrocket . If justices overturn most of the law , it will leave the Obama administration with a major salvage job in a high-pressure election year .
No matter what the outcome , both sides will be feverishly working to win the messaging war .
The Cato Institute is sending nine people , including three constitutional scholars , to the Supreme Court building . It will be a challenge to quickly skim possibly hundreds of pages of opinions so they can deliver on-scene analysis , spokesman Chris Kennedy said .
“ Obviously , our goal is to give our guys the opportunity to look at the opinion and deliver an informed opinion , ” Mr. Kennedy said . “ I ’ ll be honest , it ’ s going to be tough . ”
The libertarian-leaning think tank also has staff waiting in the wings to write op-eds for the next day ’ s newspapers and has scheduled a forum Monday afternoon where legal analysts will discuss the outcome .
The Service Employees International Union and Healthcare For America Now will deliver reactions from consumer advocates and nurses . Members of the House Republican Doctor ’ s Caucus will gather outside the Capitol to offer their take in the afternoon . Young pro-life activists plan to gather on the courthouse steps to rally against the health care law early in the morning .
The ruling is also sure to dominate on the Internet . A coalition of groups opposing the law led by the State Policy Network is using the hashtag # judgmentday to tweet about it , while supporters of the law such as Families USA and National Women ’ s Law Center say their hashtag will be # healthjustice .
As the hours ticked down Wednesday , the Obama administration and House Republicans each said they were confident they will prevail .
White House spokesman Jay Carney rattled off some of the most popular parts of the law — mandating that insurers cover young adults on their parents ’ policy and that they offer preventive services without co-payments — while brushing off questions about what the administration plans do if the court overturns parts of it .
“ I won ’ t , with just 20 hours left or so before we hear from the Supreme Court … speculate about hypothetical scenarios , ” Mr. Carney told reporters . “ We await the decision , as everyone does , and I can simply point you to what the HHS Secretary [ Kathleen ] Sebelius , has said … we are ready . ”
Aware that the court could uphold the entire law , Republicans have been hedging their bets , saying they will work to repeal the entire law no matter what happens .
“ We ’ ve made it pretty clear , and I ’ ll make it clear one more time , ” said House Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican . “ If the court does not strike down the entire law , the House will move to repeal what ’ s left of it . ”
Some used the last-minute frenzy to score political points . The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee blasted out an email with a fundraising plea from Patrick Kennedy . He is a son of the late Sen. Edward M. Kennedy , who championed the law but died shortly before Congress passed it in 2010 .
The Club for Growth took the opportunity to slam U.S. Senate candidate Tommy G. Thompson , the former Republican governor of Wisconsin , for saying in the past that he would back some type of an insurance mandate . The group says it opposes Mr. Thompson because he is not fiscally conservative enough .
The court ’ s decision could leave both sides with mixed feelings , if it chooses to strike down the mandate but leave the rest of the law in place . But things will be more polarized if the justices either uphold the whole law or strike it all down — with each side hoping they will be the ones celebrating .
Mr. Kennedy said Cato hasn ’ t planned any after-parties , but there ’ s likely to be some merrymaking if things turn out as they hope .
“ It ’ s safe to say if , in fact , the individual mandate is struck down , we ’ re going to be a pretty happy staff , ” he said . “ I anticipate there will be some staff out that day having a good time if the decision goes the way we hope . ”