Good luck . Not only will you have to navigate the technical problems that have plagued the site -- but in most states , those running the exchanges are not posting ratings that could give shoppers a clear sense of how good the plans are .
The consumer ratings are called for in the Affordable Care Act . They would be provided by a respected independent company , allowing consumers to judge health plans by treatment outcome , service and consumer satisfaction .
Federal and state officials , though , largely decided it would reflect poorly on the insurance exchanges if some companies were rated and others were not -- and have not yet published them .
`` We think that is ludicrous , '' said Garry Maisel , CEO of Western Health Advantage , an ObamaCare-approved provider . `` Consumers deserve to know what is unrated versus what has been around a long time and has a good quality rating . ''
The controversy arose last week in California , when Western Advantage and two other highly rated providers -- Kaiser Permanente and Sharp Health Care -- complained the state failed to post their ratings because of opposition from lower-rated plans .
`` When a quality rating is available , consumers should have access to it , '' said Maisel . `` If I was a consumer , I would want to know [ if ] the plan I pick , the network of providers I access care through , was just put together or has been around a long time . ''
Kaiser Permanente in California is ranked # 7 nationally . Blue Shield in California is ranked # 414 . But on the Covered California website , consumers have no way of knowing that , because the state refused to post the ratings .
Last week , officials reversed that decision and said the state will begin adding quality scores in 2015 .
`` To make a smart choice , we need more information , that is why this rating system is so important , '' said health care analyst Betsy McCaughey . `` Otherwise choosing a plan on these exchanges is just a shot in the dark . ''
The National Council on Quality Assurance rates almost every health plan available nationwide on treatment , prevention and customer service . Each category is scored on a scale of 1 to 5 , and then plans are ranked from best to worst .
Eighty percent of insurers nationwide are rated by the NCQA . But only eight states are posting those ratings . The rest , including the 34 state health care exchanges managed by the federal government , do not .
`` It is extremely important consumers have this rating information , otherwise people are just going to pick the lowest price plan when in fact a more expensive one may serve them better , '' said McCaughey .
Some states -- like Colorado , Minnesota and Oregon -- do post ratings . The Oregon website lists the quality score right next to price , allowing for an apples-to-apples comparison . Maisel said it is a model other states should strive for .
`` Value is a combination of price versus quality , '' he said . `` It 's like an equation , like a teeter totter . So put it out there ! Price is out , so put the quality rating out there and let the consumer decide who they want to buy based on value . ''
Under the law , the health care exchanges have until 2016 to display quality-of-care data .