“ The Democrats , their strategy is outrage , ” he said . “ I get that strategy . I lived that strategy . It ’ s a unifying strategy to be outraged at the other guy . The hard part is when you get in and have to deliver . ”
Jenny Beth Martin , the president and co-founder of the Tea Party Patriots , said the group ’ s email blasts against Obamacare still trigger hundreds of responses from activists angry about it . The group helped make more than 100,000 phone calls over 48 hours when the House was voting on its bill in the beginning of May to repeal and replace .
But , she said , “ We ’ re not yet on the yes side with what the Senate is doing . ”
Grass-roots activists like Pat Daugherty , who once marched on Washington against Obamacare , now sound as disgusted with Republicans in Congress as they were in the early days of the Tea Party , when they helped primary challenges against lawmakers they derided as “ Republicans in Name Only . ”
“ Every Republican in Congress ran on repealing Obamacare , ” said Ms. Daugherty , a retired university administrator in Athens , Ga. “ Why do we suddenly have a hard time repealing Obamacare when Republicans are in the majority ?
“ I know a lot of conservatives who are more upset with Republicans than with Democrats , ” she said .
David Zupan helped organize Tea Party groups in Ohio against the Affordable Care Act , which he blamed for driving up health care costs and forcing him to shutter his technology support business . Before the law , he said , he paid $ 910 per month to insure him and his wife , with a $ 750 annual deductible . When he renewed his policy last year , he said , the rates had increased to $ 2,845 per month , with a $ 3,500 deductible .
Mr. Zupan had hoped to confront Senator Rob Portman over the recess to demand that he and his fellow Republicans push for a full repeal . Mr. Portman has expressed concern that the Senate bill would roll back Medicaid too far , particularly jeopardizing treatment for opioid addiction . But Mr. Zupan gave up after being unable to figure out where Mr. Portman would be .
“ Nothing they ’ re going to do to this bill is going to make it better , ” he said .