( CNN ) - Vice President Joe Biden said what others have basically conceded - the Obama administration may fall short of its original enrollment target for Obamacare .
That might give critics another reason to attack the health care law , but the acknowledgment is consistent with what number crunchers have said previously .
`` Initially , we talked about by the end of this period having 7 million people lined up . We may not get to seven , we may get to five or six , and that 's a hell of a start , '' Biden told a gathering during an unscheduled stop in Minneapolis .
The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office predicted similar numbers in its latest budget outlook released earlier this month .
Due in part to numerous technical problems with the government 's online insurance exchange , HealthCare.gov , CBO lowered its prediction for how many people would be enrolled in the first year from 7 million to 6 million .
But health policy expert Larry Levitt said the lower figure is unlikely to have a huge impact on the health of the law as a whole .
`` The overall enrollment number is essentially an arbitrary figure that comes from CBO 's original projections of what they thought the bill would do , '' said Levitt , a senior vice president at the independent Kaiser Family Foundation . `` This 7 million projection from CBO has taken on a life of its own . ''
Total enrollment is certainly important if the law is to succeed in its central goal of growing the population of people with health insurance in America .
However , what 's more crucial to the viability of the Affordable Care Act , Levitt explained , is the health of the people signing up , not how many of them there are .
`` What 's much more important in the first years is they get the right mix of enrollees so the insurance market is stable , '' Levitt said . `` Regardless of how many people are enrolling , what matters a lot more is that they 're getting healthy people as well as sick people . ''
The first clue as to how successful the administration 's been in recruiting a diverse group of enrollees will come sometime over the summer , when insurance companies begin submitting their rates for 2015 .
`` When insurers set their premiums for 2014 , many of them built in some padding , assuming they were going to get an older sicker pool of enrollees , '' Levitt said . `` When they set their premiums for 2015 , they 'll be looking at who actually signed up compared to what they expected . ''
If premiums for 2015 go up , it will signal that insurance companies feel the customers who 've enrolled are sicker – and thus more expensive – than expected . But if premiums stay steady or even go down , it will show that the pool of customers who signed up in 2013 and 2014 met their expectations .
The effect that lower total enrollment has on the broader goal of expanding health coverage may be a bit trickier to calculate .
Under the new law , access to insurance is not limited to the exchange . Millions of people have already been enrolled through state Medicaid offices , and countless others have purchased insurance off of the exchange , whether directly from an insurance company or through a broker or private insurance marketplace .
Later this year , population surveys will begin to provide information on how many people are still uninsured , but that data may not reflect the impact of the entire six-month open-enrollment period .
In the spring , insurance companies will begin filing quarterly reports to state regulators detailing how many people they insure , and organizations like Kaiser will aggregate that data to paint a nationwide picture .
But Levitt points out even this data may be problematic .
`` We 'll probably have a data brawl over these numbers for the rest of the year , '' Levitt said . `` We 'll be able to see how many more people are insured , how many fewer people are uninsured . What 's not knowable is what would 've happened in the absence of the Affordable Care Act . ''