You don ’ t need a degree in higher math to see that the numbers for President Obama ’ s health care takeover don ’ t add up . Obamacare doles out generous subsidies to the elderly in the expectation that healthy young people will pay higher premiums to cover the added costs of insuring the old .
The millennials , to Mr. Obama ’ s surprise and sorrow , aren ’ t as credulous as he thought they would be . They haven ’ t signed up for Obamacare in appreciable numbers . So he ’ s preparing a bailout , and what he has in mind may be against the law .
Tucked inside the thousand-page Obamacare legislation are provisions guaranteeing profits for insurance companies to entice them to play the government ’ s game . If insurance firms join the exchanges and pay out more in medical claims than they anticipate , taxpayers would cover their losses .
The administration expected 40 percent of adult enrollees to be under age 35 , but so far only 24 percent fit that crucial demographic . A scheme known as “ risk corridors ” would be used to pay back the private insurance companies for losses plus a 3 percent profit . With the prospect of “ free ” government cash , reimbursement requests will soon flood the bureaucracy .
When congressional inquisitors asked Kathleen Sebelius , the secretary of Health and Human Services , in December how much this would cost , she simply shrugged . “ We won ’ t know anything about what that risk corridor looks like until we get more enrollment , ” she said . Since it never bothered to get an estimate , the administration intends to write a blank check .
A new report by the Congressional Research Service says the White House can ’ t do that . A bailout for insurers requires action by Congress , in an explicit appropriation of funds .
“ Statutory and constitutional provisions , ” the congressional analysts found , “ prohibit federal agencies from making payments in the absence of a valid appropriation . Under longstanding [ Government Accountability Office ] interpretations , an appropriation must consist of both a direction to pay and a specified source of funds . ”
There has been no such appropriation for “ the risk corridor ” program . Mr. Obama thinks he has the pen to sign as many checks as he needs to keep his health care scheme afloat .
The White House knows it can ’ t take hat in hand to Congress to ask for a proper appropriation . Only a handful of Obamacare diehards would go on record this election year to authorize a billion-dollar giveaway to the insurance men , who are held in barely higher esteem than a congressman ( or a journalist ) .
House Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton requested the legal analysis to rally support to force the president to obey the law . “ This memo raises serious questions on the legality of the administration ’ s plan , ” he says , “ just the latest in a pattern of unilateral delays and actions outside the bounds of the law . We must protect taxpayer dollars even as the administration rushes to cover up its failures in implementing the health law . ”
If Congress , once so jealous of its constitutional prerogatives , allows the president to get away with taking unconstitutional control of the nation ’ s purse strings , Congress will render itself irrelevant .
Mr. Obama will use his pen to spend whatever he thinks he can get away with . Congress must send the executive and his advisers to a class in remedial arithmetic .