It ’ s easy to find clips of presidential candidate Beto O ’ Rourke talking about health care . He posts about it on Facebook . It comes up at multiple town halls that he held during his 2018 Senate campaign .
What ’ s a lot harder is figuring out exactly what type of health care system the former Texas Congress member supports .
O ’ Rourke entered the Democratic primary Thursday , and a close reading of his policy positions on health care reveals he vacillates between Medicare-for-all as “ the best way to ensure Americans get the health care they need ” and criticism of the Medicare-for-all plans offered . He once described writing his own Medicare-for-all plan , but so far , no such plan has been made public . His presidential campaign site doesn ’ t yet have a section on policy proposals .
Best I can tell , O ’ Rourke definitely supports the idea of universal health care where all Americans have access to affordable coverage . But what exactly he means is murky .
Viewed one way , O ’ Rourke may just be keeping an open mind . Some of his criticisms of Bernie Sanders ’ s plan are interesting ( he favors copayments , for instance , which are a feature of many European health care systems but not Canada ’ s ) . He mentions a “ dual system , ” potentially a mix of private and public insurers .
But viewed another way , his difficult-to-decipher health care views could also suggest more tepid engagement with an issue that will be crucial to the primary debate . His views on health care are , in a way , similar to his views on immigration , which the Washington Post described as “ no wall , few specifics . ”
O ’ Rourke isn ’ t turning up with a binder full of white papers . And to run a presidential campaign — or to run a White House — he ’ s eventually going to need those .
A brief timeline of how Beto O ’ Rourke talks about Medicare-for-all
Here ’ s a bit of a timeline from what I ’ ve been able to piece together of O ’ Rourke ’ s views on Medicare-for-all , looking at the statements he ’ s made and interviews he ’ s done over the past year and a half :
June 15 , 2017 : Writes a Facebook post that says , “ A single-payer Medicare-for-all program is the best way to ensure all Americans get the healthcare they need . ”
June 17 , 2017 : Writes a much longer Facebook post saying , “ We need a single-payer health care system for all Americans , ” but that he wouldn ’ t co-sponsor the House bill for single-payer health care because it excluded for-profit providers from participating in the system .
September 20 , 2017 : Tells the Texas Observer that he likes the Sanders bill but says he disagrees with the lack of copays and premiums for all Americans . He ’ d prefer that Americans kick in something .
September 23 , 2017 : Speaking at an event at the University of Texas , O ’ Rourke outlines a four-step plan for getting to universal coverage . Step one is keeping Obamacare , step two is expanding Medicaid in all 50 states , step three is a public option , and step four is something similar to Sanders ’ s Medicare-for-all bill .
“ If we could get to the last step tomorrow , I would take it in a second , ” O ’ Rourke said at that event . “ It ’ s important to both be as idealistic and describe as accurately as you can the vision , the goal we want to get to , and then be pragmatic about what it ’ s going to take to get there . ”
October 9 , 2017 : Jeff Stein ( then a reporter at ███ , now at the Washington Post ) asks O ’ Rourke if he would support the Sanders bill should he win his Senate race in Texas . “ The answer is yes , I would , ” O ’ Rourke tells him .
November 6 , 2017 : O ’ Rourke does an interview with the Young Turks where he talks about how to get to universal coverage . “ I ’ m not an expert on this by any means , but the only way I understand is to have some kind of a single-payer model , ” O ’ Rourke says . “ And the best one going in the United States now is Medicare. ” He goes on to talk about the possibility of starting with a Medicare buy-in that would eventually transition to a full single-payer system .
March 16 , 2018 : O ’ Rourke tells Bill Maher that health care is his No . 2 policy priority .
“ Universal health care , the ability for everyone to see a doctor regardless of income , ” he tells Maher .
“ If that ’ s how we get there , that ’ s how we get there , ” O ’ Rourke responds , which Maher notes is “ a big if . ”
July 14 , 2018 : A Politico story notes that O ’ Rourke “ no longer uses phrases like ‘ single-payer ’ or ‘ Medicare for all , ’ ” instead replacing those with “ universal , guaranteed , high-quality health care for all . ”
January 18 , 2018 : O ’ Rourke posts a campaign video where he talks a bit more about his vision : “ What ’ s my vision ? Universal health care and very likely that will involve some form of a single-payer system . Some expansion of Medicare , perhaps from where it is right now at 65 all the way down to zero . Or I ’ m open , if somebody has a better way to do this , including especially Republicans , I ’ m open to their vision of how to get there. ” He then goes on to talk about adding Medicare to the marketplace as a public option as “ a step we can take on the road to getting to universal health care . ”
December 19 , 2018 : The Associated Press reports , “ O ’ Rourke has endorsed single-payer health care but says he doesn ’ t support ‘ Medicare-for-all ’ because expanding the program could adversely affect current recipients . ”
I ’ ve reached out to O ’ Rourke ’ s campaign to ask where he currently stands on Medicare-for-all , and will update this story if I get more information . However , he did talk a bit about Medicare-for-all in Iowa Thursday , and seemed to shy away from the label .
@ BetoORourke didn ’ t embrace the Medicare4All label , suggested a single payer system isn ’ t politically possible in near term . “ I ’ m convinced we will have to work from as much common ground as possible . No 1 person or 1 political party can force the decision on this. ” # iacaucus https : //t.co/ovP5vIvEud — O. Kay Henderson ( @ okayhenderson ) March 14 , 2019
Generally , these statements seem to tell the story of him starting as a Medicare-for-all supporter but then slowly backing away from the label , instead talking more about a universal coverage system that might be single-payer or might be something else .
This primary is heavy on policy . So far , O ’ Rourke isn ’ t .
This is the fourth election cycle I ’ ve covered as a journalist and by far the one that is heaviest on policy . Part of that seems to owe to the fact that we have a Democratic primary field dominated by Senators , the type of people who are constantly engaged with creating and pushing new policy ideas .
In the runup to 2020 , we ’ ve seen Democrats rolling out one ambitious policy proposal after another — all attempting to put forward a signature idea that might catch fire with the base ( much in the same way Sanders ’ s Medicare-for-all idea has ) . Before Cory Booker launched his presidential bid , he rolled out an ambitious plan to give all American kids money from the government in an attempt to reduce the racial wealth gap . Elizabeth Warren preceded her announcement with a plan to have the federal government manufacture generic drugs . Kamala Harris , meanwhile , went with a plan to alleviate poverty that gives billions to low-income Americans .
But O ’ Rourke doesn ’ t have a signature policy — he has a signature style . He listens , and he talks a lot about his vision without giving a clear sense of how to get there .
Even on a key policy like Medicare-for-all , one that will no doubt be debated aggressively this primary , he doesn ’ t really articulate a clear vision for how he would handle that issue . This has its benefits . Medicare-for-all is inherently a legislative idea that would have to go through compromise and negotiation , and flip tough votes . And who knows , maybe he ’ ll come up with one soon !
But for now , Beto is entering the race without clearly stating his view of what a health care system ought to look like — a view that lots of other candidates are bringing to the table .