Endnotes and citations are available in the PDF and Scribd versions .
Today , pharmaceutical industry executives set the prices that Americans pay for drugs with their own profits in mind , rather than based on how well the drug works . Surveys show that roughly two-thirds of Americans—including majorities of Democrats , Republicans , and Independents—support government action to make prescription drugs more affordable .
This issue brief builds on the ███ ’ previous drug pricing proposals and outlines a framework to establish a negotiation process for Medicare and private health care payers . This approach incorporates comparative effectiveness research , or CER , which compares the clinical benefits of two or more treatment alternatives , such as prescription drugs . Backing up these negotiations with the prospect of binding arbitration would empower Medicare and private payers to negotiate drug prices effectively . The Congressional Budget Office has said that Medicare would lack sufficient leverage to negotiate lower prices effectively absent additional policy changes , such as permitting Medicare to establish a formulary , or list of covered drugs . Under this proposal , the existence of the arbitration process would provide the needed leverage for Medicare without the need to develop a formulary .
It is also important to make sure that insurers and other health care payers pass along the savings from these negotiations to consumers . For this reason , drugs with value-based prices will have preferential cost sharing so that patients will be able to afford their medications . And by increasing the prevalence and usage of CER , this framework will also give doctors more information about clinical benefits of the drugs they prescribe , which will help them select the best treatments for their patients .
Under the new negotiation framework , a drug manufacturer would continue to set the price for a drug after it receives approval from the Food and Drug Administration , or FDA , as is currently the case . During the first three months following FDA approval , the secretary of health and human services could decide to refer the drug for comparative effectiveness research review . In determining whether to do so , she would take into account the drug ’ s current price , prevalence and usage , approved indications , and the number of alternative treatments for each approved use .
The review would be conducted separately by two different certified research organizations , which would be selected automatically from a rotation of qualifying organizations . These organizations would have been previously certified by the secretary ; they must be independent , free of any conflicts of interest , and have a transparent methodology that can be reviewed by third parties . They should be nonprofits governed by a board that includes representatives from payers , patients , drug manufacturers , and consumer groups . Moreover , in certifying a CER organization , the secretary should consider groups with different CER methodologies .
Once a drug is selected for review , its manufacturer would be required to submit any existing internal comparative effectiveness data to the certified organizations . These include any data that the manufacturer has sent to foreign regulators as part of the drug approval or pricing processes in other countries . Manufacturers may also use this opportunity to submit any additional data they wish to include .
Nine months after the submission of these data to the certified comparative effectiveness research organizations , the organizations would release a draft price recommendation report . Based on the drug ’ s comparative effectiveness , the report would categorize the drug in terms of whether it provides no added benefit , minor added benefit , or significant added benefit compared with alternative treatments . Added benefits would include improved health status , shortened disease duration , extended life expectancy , reduced side effects , and improved quality of life .
Following publication of the draft report , there would be a 90-day public comment period . The certified organizations would release a final report after considering these comments . If a certified organization felt that additional CER trials were necessary to determine the level of added benefit , then it could petition the secretary for additional time before releasing the draft report .
The report must also include a recommended price for the drug , based on its level of clinical benefit . For most drugs , this will be presented as the average manufacturer price , or AMP , for the standard course of treatment . AMP represents the average price paid by wholesalers or retail pharmacies to drug manufacturers for a drug . The report would use AMP instead of a drug ’ s list price or the average sales price , since list prices do not necessarily correspond to the prices actually paid , and average sales price is generally only calculated for drugs covered by Medicare Part B . For drugs that treat chronic conditions , it would be the average price for one year of treatment .
This CER review and price recommendation process would be funded by reallocating and eventually renewing the fee on insurers that partially funds the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute , or PCORI . In addition , the proposal would require that drug manufacturers pay an equivalent fee . PCORI would be eligible to apply for certification as one of the CER organizations .
Since two separate organizations would be issuing price recommendations for each referred drug , these two prices would form the recommended price range . This price range , as well as the additional comparative effectiveness research data and the CER organizations ’ reports , will give health care payers additional information to inform their negotiations with the drug industry . All payers—including Medicare—could negotiate with drug corporations about the price of a drug .
If the drug ’ s price were already within the recommended range , or if payers were able to negotiate the price to a level within the range , no additional steps would be necessary . In these cases , since the drug ’ s price reflects its benefit to patients , the payer must give the drug preferential cost sharing to consumers .
If , after negotiations , the price offered to the payer is higher than the recommended range , the drug manufacturer must submit to the secretary detailed information about its pricing decision within three months . This information would be posted publicly and include a consumer-friendly report on the following : A justification for the company ’ s list price ; detailed data on patient utilization ; the costs of manufacturing the drug ; the costs of developing the drug ; the costs of marketing the drug ; the profits the company has made and expected to make from the drug ; the company ’ s lobbying expenditures ; the company ’ s CEO pay ; the company ’ s campaign contributions ; and the company ’ s spending on patient assistance programs—both by itself and through charities and other third parties—for the drug .
Moreover , any payer—including Medicare—could request binding arbitration if the price following negotiation remains outside the range .
Once a payer requests arbitration , an arbitrator would be selected from a predetermined list . The Government Accountability Office would create the list of arbitrators , and the final arbitrator would be selected by each party taking turns striking out arbitrators until there is one arbitrator left . Arbitrators must not have financial or personal conflicts of interest . The arbitrator would have access to all of the CER and transparency data , as well as to proposed prices from the two independent organizations and the drug manufacturers .
Absent a settlement , the arbitrator would determine the price . At any time during arbitration , the manufacturer could submit further information and documentation to support its case . If a drug has already been the subject of arbitration for one payer but a subsequent payer is also unable to negotiate a value-based price and requests arbitration , then the final price from the first arbitration process will be used .
Of course , the pricing decision made by pharmaceutical executives at a drug ’ s launch is not the only relevant factor . As shown by the recent controversy over Mylan executives ’ decision to repeatedly increase the price for EpiPens , drug corporations often exploit market conditions to increase prices for existing drugs dramatically , despite the drug itself remaining the same .
For this reason , the negotiation-arbitration framework would not stop after the initial price report and negotiations . After the third year , the secretary may , at her discretion , restart the process by re-referring a drug to the independent organizations for additional review . Some things that might prompt the secretary to do this include significant price increases , the availability of new treatments , or new evidence of a drug ’ s effectiveness . For example , a second review could be triggered by pharmaceutical executives ’ decision to increase the price of their drugs by more than the Consumer Price Index plus 1 percentage point .
This framework would establish a pro-patient , value-based system for drug pricing . It would accomplish this goal by empowering Medicare and private payers to negotiate drug prices more effectively , while also addressing egregious price increases on existing drugs . Furthermore , it would give doctors more information about the clinical effectiveness of different treatment options and increase patient access to critical medicines by making these treatments more affordable . The government must act to give patients what they deserve : a drug pricing framework that puts their needs above drug corporations ’ bottom lines .
Topher Spiro is the Vice President for Health Policy at the ███ . Maura Calsyn is the Director of Health Policy at the Center . Thomas Huelskoetter is the Research Associate for Health Policy at the Center .