Scientists say they have , for the first time , cloned human embryos capable of producing embryonic stem cells .
The accomplishment is a long-sought step toward harnessing the potential power of embryonic stem cells to treat many human diseases . But the work also raises a host of ethical concerns .
`` This is a huge scientific advance , '' said Dr. George Daley , a Harvard stem cell scientist who was n't involved in the work . `` But it 's going to , I think , raise the specter of controversy again . ''
The controversy arises from several factors . The experiments involve creating and then destroying human embryos for research purposes , which some find morally repugnant . The scientists also used cloning techniques , which raise concerns that the research could lead to the cloning of people .
Ever since human embryonic stem cells were discovered , scientists have had high hopes for them because the cells can morph into any kind of cell in the body . That ability means , in theory , that they could be used eventually to treat all sorts of illnesses , including diabetes , Alzheimer 's , Parkinson 's and spinal cord injuries .
So for years , scientists have been trying to use cloning techniques to make embryonic stem cells that are essentially a genetic match for patients . The idea is that such a close match would prevent their bodies from rejecting the cells .
`` It 's been a holy grail that we 've been after for years , '' says Dr. John Gearhart , a stem cell pioneer at the University of Pennsylvania .
But every previous attempt ended in failure or fraud , leading many scientists to wonder if the goal might be impossible to reach .
Making Personalized Stem Cells Scientists report Wednesday that they have successfully cloned human embryos from a person 's skin cells . Here 's how they could eventually use the technology to create new therapies for a patient .
However , Shoukhrat Mitalipov of the Oregon Health & Science University and his colleagues never gave up . They succeeded in mice and monkeys . And in this week 's issue of the journal Cell , Mitalipov 's team reports they finally did it in humans .
`` I 'm very excited , '' Mitalipov says . `` It 's a very significant advance . ''
The researchers first recruited women who were willing to provide eggs for the research . Next , they removed most of the DNA from each egg and replaced the genetic material with DNA from other peoples ' skin cells .
Then , after a long search , they finally found the best way to stimulate each egg so that it would develop into an embryo without the need to be fertilized with sperm . The key turned out to be a combination of chemicals and an electric pulse .
`` We had to find the perfect combination , '' Mitalipov says . As it turned out , that perfect combination included something surprising : caffeine .
`` The Starbucks experiment , I guess , '' quipped Daley . `` This little change in the cocktail was what really allowed the experiment to really ultimately succeed . ''
That ingredient , plus other tweaks in the process , including using fresh eggs and determining the optimal stage of each egg 's development , Mitalipov says .
The researchers showed that the resulting embryos could develop to a stage where they could produce healthy stem cells containing the genes from the skin cells . They even showed that the stem cells could be turned into other types of cells , including heart cells that in a laboratory dish could pulse like a beating heart .
First of all , the Oregon researchers compensated women financially to donate eggs for the experiments — something many in the field have considered ethically questionable .
But beyond that , the creation and destruction of a human embryo is morally repugnant to people who believe an embryo has the same moral standing as a human being .
`` This is a case in which one is deliberately setting out to create a human being for the sole purpose of destroying that human being , '' says Dr. Daniel Sulmasy , a professor of medicine and a bioethicist at the University of Chicago . `` I 'm of the school that thinks that that 's morally wrong no matter how much good could come of it . ''
Moreover , Mitalipov used the same method that researchers used previously to clone Dolly the sheep . That approach raises the possibility that scientists could try to clone a human being .
`` This raises serious problems because it is the first actual human cloning , '' Sulmasy says . `` We already know there are people out there who are itching to be able to be the first to bring a cloned human being to birth . And I think it 's going to happen . ''
But Mitalipov dismisses those concerns . He says the embryos he created are n't the equivalent of a human being because they were n't fertilized naturally . And his experiments with monkeys indicate that it 's unlikely that they could ever develop into a healthy baby .
`` The procedures we developed actually are very efficient to make stem cells , but it 's unlikely that this will be very useful for kind of reproductive cloning , '' Mitalipov says .
Other researchers agree with him and argue that the possible benefits of the research outweigh the concerns . `` Where you can improve [ a patient 's ] quality of life tremendously through this kind of technology , I personally believe that it is ethical to use material like this , '' Gearhart says .
The scientists acknowledge that it will be years before anyone knows whether this step will actually result in treatments that might help patients . In the meantime , it 's clear that the intense debate over embryonic stem cells is far from over .