`` If you like your health care plan , you will be able to keep your health care plan . Period . '' ( Pause for applause . ) `` No one will take it away . No matter what . ''
That was one of President Obama 's signature promises that he made when selling his health reform plan . Critics said it was unlikely to be true at the time . Americans are now seeing plainly that it was not true . And now , NBC News reports , the Obama Administration knew this was a lie based on how the Obamacare regulations were written and revised .
The Obama Administration changed a `` grandfathering '' provision that would have allowed most Americans to keep their insurance and , as a result , estimated that 40 % to 67 % of all members of the individual health insurance market would lose their plans .
The law states that policies in effect as of March 23 , 2010 will be “ grandfathered , ” meaning consumers can keep those policies even though they don ’ t meet requirements of the new health care law . But the Department of Health and Human Services then wrote regulations that narrowed that provision , by saying that if any part of a policy was significantly changed since that date -- the deductible , co-pay , or benefits , for example -- the policy would not be grandfathered . Buried in Obamacare regulations from July 2010 is an estimate that because of normal turnover in the individual insurance market , “ 40 to 67 percent ” of customers will not be able to keep their policy . And because many policies will have been changed since the key date , “ the percentage of individual market policies losing grandfather status in a given year exceeds the 40 to 67 percent range . ”
It was hard to believe that the Obama Administration believed their own rhetoric about `` keeping your health insurance plan '' under Obamacare , and we now know that they did n't believe it either . But President Obama kept on making that same promise to Americans , over and over , even as recently as in last year 's debates with his rival Mitt Romney .
The reason that insurance plans are getting canceled and new plans are more expensive is due to the Obama Administration 's new minimum guidelines for what insurance must cover . Their rhetoric is that the new insurance is better .
Tell that to Jacqueline Proctor , the 60-year-old Californian whose new insurance must cover childcare and maternity care . Her insurance will cost `` more than twice as much '' as her old insurance and is mandated that she purchase insurance for services that she will never use .