As predicted , the Obama administration and many in the Democratic Party are trying to peddle the story that ObamaCare is now working because the healthcare.gov website is functioning better .
But despite the questionable claims of easier access and more people enrolling in the ObamaCare exchanges , the ugly truth is the horror stories are piling up and , sooner or later , ObamaCare ’ s cheerleaders will have to confront the overwhelming evidence indicting them for repeatedly lying to the American people .
As expected , President Obama used his State of the Union speech Tuesday to extol the virtues of ObamaCare , and also as expected , retold the story of one person positively affected by the program . But for each success there are countless failures .
People ’ s Exhibit A : Josie Gracchi has breast cancer . Up until January 1st of this year she had insurance and was scheduled for a January 3rd biopsy and follow-up treatment at one the largest private cancer treatment centers in the world : Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York .
But once 2014 arrived , her insurance was rolled into an ObamaCare health exchange .
She now has no access to the surgeons she was working with , her biopsy and treatment have been postponed and she can ’ t find comparable doctors and surgeons through the ObamaCare website .
She pleaded on television for help from the president , but has yet to receive an answer .
People ’ s Exhibit B : Whitney Johnson of Texas is a new mom at 26 and suffers from Multiple Sclerosis . Her treatments were expensive , $ 40,000 every five weeks , but her insurance was paying for those treatments .
Then came January 1 , 2014 when the insurance was canceled ; her insurance company is actually leaving the state of Texas because her plan no longer complies with ObamaCare .
Whitney liked her plan , which President Obama and a cast of countless Democrats told her she ’ d be able to keep . She doesn ’ t know what she ’ ll do now .
People ’ s Exhibit C : Gloria Cantor of Florida was told her insurance was being dropped because of ObamaCare . She has five brain tumors as well as tumors in her bones . Her insurance company told her that it can offer a different plan , but it will be more expensive . Another reason why “ if you like your plan you can keep it ” was labeled the “ lie of the year ” for 2013 .
People ’ s Exhibit D : Joan Carrico is a 60 year old registered nurse in Michigan suffering from cancer , now going on six years .
She liked her insurance which was expensive but affordable . Then she was told by her insurance company that her best bet under ObamaCare would be a plan that would increase her premium anywhere from $ 4,500 to $ 6,500 per year , as well as a 10 percent federal tax .
Remember when Obama told us families would save $ 2,500 a year under ObamaCare ? Complete fiction .
Question : What could be worse than being kicked off the health care plan you prefer when you need it most – when you ’ re suffering from a serious medical condition or debilitating disease ?
Answer : Having the government come after you in the form of the IRS following your decision to go public about your dire situation .
People ’ s Exhibit E : Bill Elliot of South Carolina has stage four cancer and had insurance that covered most of his treatments . Then it was canceled because of ObamaCare .
His doctor told him he is in full remission , his treatments have been working .
He voted for Obama , in part because he believed the president ’ s words when he said “ if you like your plan you can keep it. ” But the new policy under ObamaCare would cost him $ 1,500 per month along with a $ 13,000 deductible , and it won ’ t even cover medicine or medical devices .
Elliot went public about his dilemma , doing media interviews to bring attention to his situation . All of a sudden he received a letter from the IRS telling him they would be auditing him for tax year 2009 .
Moody ’ s Investor Service just downgraded its outlook for the U.S. health insurance industry from stable to negative because of serious concerns with the implementation of ObamaCare .
Moody ’ s Senior Vice President Stephen Zaharuk said : `` While we 've had industry risks from regulatory changes on our radar for a while , the ongoing unstable and evolving environment is a key factor for our outlook change . ”
The cost of the empty promises and outright lies is enormous both in human and financial terms . What these people are experiencing is exactly what Moody ’ s Investor Service is so concerned about . ObamaCare is really NobamaCare .