Come 2014 , you 'll have to pay a tax if you 're uninsured -- but how exactly it 's going to work is still getting sorted out . The IRS is n't sure how many people they 'll have to hire , or how much implementation will end up costing :
The changes will require new regulations , forms and publications , new computer programs and a big new outreach program to explain it all to taxpayers and tax professionals . Businesses that do n't claim an exemption will have to prove they offer health insurance to employees . The health care law `` includes the largest set of tax law changes in more than 20 years , '' according to the Treasury inspector general who oversees the IRS . The agency will have to hire thousands of workers to manage it , requiring significant budget increases that already are being targeted by congressional Republicans determined to dismantle the president 's signature initiative . `` Knowing the complexity of the health law , there 's no question that the IRS is going to struggle with this , '' said Rep. Charles Boustany Jr. , R-La. , chairman of the House Ways and Means oversight subcommittee . `` The IRS wants more resources . Well , we need to start digging down into what are they doing with the resources and personnel . ''
The number of new employees the IRS will need to hire varies widely , depending on who asks : Republican Congressmen estimate 16,500 , but the IRS says this is inaccurate , and that the budget calls for no more than 1,200 . Rep. Dave Camp ( R-MI ) , chairman of the Ways and Means Committee , plans to hold a hearing next week in the hopes of finding a more concrete estimate of what the IRS will need .
Here 's an interesting loophole , though : the IRS does n't have a whole lot of recourse to collect the tax from the uninsured , besides withholding a tax refund . And if the tax exceeds the refund , not paying it will be more of a money saver :
The penalty will be fully phased in by 2016 , when it will be $ 695 for each uninsured adult or 2.5 percent of family income , whichever is greater , up to $ 12,500 . The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office estimates that 4 million people will pay the penalty that year . The law , however , severely limits the ability of the IRS to collect the penalties . There are no civil or criminal penalties for refusing to pay it and the IRS can not seize bank accounts or dock wages to collect it . No interest accumulates for unpaid penalties . So how can the IRS enforce the mandate ? Scary letters and threats to withhold tax refunds . The law allows the IRS to withhold tax refunds to collect the penalty , and most filers get refunds . This year , 77 percent of the 135 million individual income tax returns processed by the IRS qualified for a refund . The average refund : $ 2,707 . For those who do n't qualify for a refund , a stern letter from the IRS can be effective , even if it does n't come with the threat of civil or criminal penalties , said Elizabeth Maresca , a former IRS trial attorney who supervises the Tax & Consumer Litigation Clinic at the Fordham University law school . `` Most people pay because they 're scared , and I do n't think that 's going to change , '' Maresca said .
It 'll be interesting to see how effective the tax is -- but of course , the better option would be a full repeal before implementation is necessary . Here 's hoping ...