As Senate Republicans try to revise and resuscitate their alternative to the Affordable Care Act , issues with the current law of the land are only getting worse as co-ops crash , insurers pull out of individual markets and premiums spike to double-digit highs .
Democrats have decried the plan to repeal and replace ObamaCare and instead have pushed to patch up problems with the malfunctioning model . Even the law ’ s namesake , former President Barack Obama , has admitted the ACA could use some tweaking .
In a recent Facebook post , Obama said the law wasn ’ t perfect but “ represented a significant step forward for America. ” President Trump has called it a “ disaster ” and claims every other nation in the world has a better system in place .
The competing – and often contradictory – narratives and statistics on health insurance complicate efforts to dissect the data . But the overall trend lines still appear to be going in the wrong direction , upping the pressure on Congress to find a fix .
“ ObamaCare is absolutely imploding , ” Rep. Trent Franks , R-Ariz. , told ███ ’ “ America ’ s Newsroom . ”
One glaring symptom of the ACA ’ s challenges has been the fate of consumer operated and oriented plans , or co-ops . These small nonprofit insurers were created to boost competition , expand the number of health insurance providers available in rural areas and in turn lead to lower prices for coverage .
In 2014 , there were 23 co-ops operating across the country . By 2015 , all had posted annual losses , according to the National Alliance of State Health Co-Ops .
The company , which has around 37,000 customers in Massachusetts and New Hampshire , called it quits in late June . ( The company plans to reopen as a for-profit in January 2018 . )
CEO Tom Policelli blamed the exit on a provision in the ACA that requires insurers with healthier customers to make payments to insurers with sicker customers . Policelli called the risk adjustment program “ highly volatile . ”
Larger insurers have also begun to bolt certain states , leading to reduced options for consumers in the individual market .
A June Kaiser Family Foundation analysis estimates 38 out of 3,143 counties – or about 1.2 percent – could be at risk of having no insurer on the marketplace in 2018 . This year , roughly a third of counties have access to just one insurer on the marketplace , according to the report .
That ’ s a hard fall for the ACA , which touted an average of five insurers participating in each state ACA marketplace in 2014 . In 2015 , that average bumped up to six insurers per state , ranging from one in West Virginia to 16 in New York , according to Kaiser . Things took a turn in 2016 following the failure of several co-ops , which brought the average down to 5.6 per state . In fiscal 2017 , big insurance losses led to high-profile exits dragging the average down even more to 4.3 .
The decision by health insurance giants Aetna and Humana to pull out of some state exchanges has rattled other insurers and raised concerns over the stability of the individual market .
In June , Anthem announced it would pull out of Ohio ’ s marketplace leaving some counties with no insurers . Anthem ’ s exit was particularly bruising because the state had been one of the most competitive marketplaces in the country . In 2016 , 17 insurers sold plans in Ohio .
Anthem didn ’ t mince words about why it was leaving . The company cited a lack of certainty around billions of federal dollars in subsidies they thought were coming their way as well as a lack of “ overall predictability . ”
Under ObamaCare , insurance subsides are doled out though refundable tax credits for individuals making between $ 16,000 and $ 47,000 per year as well as through cost-sharing reductions , where additional subsidies are paid by the government directly to insurers to help lower the amount customers pay for deductibles and co-pays .
The Trump administration has been vague about whether they ’ ll pay and has said the president could decide to nix the subsidies whenever he wanted , creating more market confusion .
During the campaign season , Republicans seized on the uncertainty and cited rising insurance premiums as the primary reason ObamaCare needs to go . It ’ s a fight that continues to this day .
Unlike candidate Trump who made bold statements about what he would do to get rid of ObamaCare and the speed with which he would do it , President Trump and his administration have waffled on ways to stabilize the insurance markets . The president even has suggested a few times letting it implode .
Trump tweeted “ Death spiral ! ” following Aetna ’ s announcement that it would pull out of the Virginia ACA exchange in 2018 . When Humana announced its exit , Trump claimed , “ ObamaCare continues to fail . ”
The comments did little to soothe growing concerns of instability .
Some insurers still willing to offer plans under ObamaCare have braced themselves for financial hits by hiking premiums – though how much varies .
According to Kaiser , customers in Phoenix , Ariz. , are facing a 145 percent increase whereas in Providence , R.I. , customers could see a 14 percent decrease .
A lot of what happens next with ObamaCare depends on if the Trump administration and Republican-controlled Congress – let alone Republicans and Democrats – can get on the same page .
Industry watchers warn that until the White House and Capitol Hill can present a united front , even more dramatic premium hikes will be passed on to customers .