And it ’ s not just people on Medicaid who would lose coverage if Republicans got their way . While Republicans in Congress have not unified by a single alternative to Obamacare , a building block of virtually every proposal in circulation is to equalize the tax treatment of employer-sponsored insurance and individual insurance—which , in layman ’ s terms , means making it much more appealing for somebody who gets coverage on the job to buy coverage on his or her own . Typically these proposals would allow insurers selling individual coverage to continue some of their current practices , like charging higher premiums or refusing to cover certain services for people with pre-existing conditions , or offering coverage with serous gaps in benefits . Most experts believe such reforms would hike the cost of employer plans , as only sicker people remained on them , potentially creating a “ death spiral ” that would lead to fewer employers offering plans . ( Even the more optimistic estimates assume erosion of employer-sponsored insurance . )
Note the difference in scale here . Nobody knows exactly how many people are giving up non-group policies because insurers are reacting to Obamacare regulations . But it 's probably in the millions—and still substantially less than the number of people who would lose insurance if Ryan 's proposal for Medicaid became law .
More important , though , look at the kind of change taking place . Almost everybody giving up a non-group policy today has the option to get new insurance either through Medicaid or one of the new Obamacare marketplaces . Some people will pay more for these policies , some will pay less , but everybody will be getting coverage that includes an array of `` essential '' benefits , limits out-of-pocket spending , and can never be taken away or limited because the policyholder gets sick . In other words , everybody ends up with comprehensive , stable insurance . It may not be the policy he or she has today . But the vast majority of people with non-group market don ’ t keep the same policy for more than two years anyway .
Under the Republican plan , by contrast , people losing employer insurance would end up in the dysfunctional , non-reformed individual market—the one full of confusing , junk policies that might not cover basic services like maternity or mental health or have huge gaps in coverage . And the people losing Medicaid ? They would end up with … nothing at all .