Now that Barack Obama has formally backed Hillary Clinton for president , let 's check in on how his signature domestic `` accomplishment '' is working for the American people -- bearing in mind that the policy was originally her brainchild . She agrees with Obama that the law is working , even as she struggles to adequately explain its obvious failures . Speaking of which , here 's the lede from a fresh New York Times story entitled , `` why do health costs keep rising ? These people know : ''
The Geisinger Health Plan , run by one of the nation ’ s top-rated health care organizations , foresees medical costs increasing next year by 7.5 percent for people buying insurance under the Affordable Care Act . So when Geisinger requested a rate increase of 40 percent for 2017 , consumer advocates were amazed . And Kurt J. Wrobel , Geisinger ’ s chief actuary , found himself , along with other members of his profession , in the middle of the health care wars still raging in this political year ... “ Our rates for Medicare , Medicaid and employer-sponsored insurance have been relatively stable , but those products have to bear the cost of our losses on exchange business , ” Mr. Wrobel said . Last October the Pennsylvania Insurance Department , headed by a former Obama administration official , approved a 20 percent increase in Geisinger ’ s rates , about half of what the company had requested . “ But based on experience , ” Mr. Wrobel said , “ the 2016 premium rate is too low , so we want to correct it in 2017 . ”
Insurer @ POTUS proclaimed a model for # Obamacare wants a 40 percent premium increase : https : //t.co/FUb1hbxuGI — Chris Jacobs ( @ chrisjacobsHC ) June 9 , 2016
Did Obama applaud this particular insurer ' a model ' for his program ? He sure did . Back to the Times :
During debate on the 2010 health care law , Mr. Obama and members of Congress repeatedly hailed it as a model providing “ high-quality care at costs well below average , ” in the president ’ s words . Geisinger serves residents of rural central and northeast Pennsylvania , and its roots in the community are as deep as the coal mines that once flourished here ... It would be difficult to find a health plan more aligned with the goals of the federal law . The Obama administration recruited a former chief executive of the Geisinger Health Plan , Dr. Richard J. Gilfillan , to be the first director of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation , created by the health law to test ways to improve care and cut costs . Geisinger has been a pioneer in the use of electronic health records and genomic medicine , recruiting 100,000 patients for DNA sequencing studies in the last two years . It has embraced “ pay for performance , ” offering a warranty for major surgical procedures and promising not to charge extra if complications occur . But innovation has been no match for the actuarial surprises dealt out by the Affordable Care Act . Mr. Wrobel said Geisinger had simply underestimated how much care its new customers would need .
And when aspirational wish-casting meets hard actuarial realities , bookkeepers request 40 percent rate increases . Meanwhile , Goldman Sachs analysts have confirmed what the nonpartisan CBO and others have long known to be the case . Namely , that Obamacare has had a decidedly chilling effect on America 's employment picture . Ed Morrissey examines the new findings after running through recent paltry jobs and GDP numbers , which reflect Obama 's sputtering recovery :
The number of part-time workers in jobs for economic reasons shot up by 468,000 , apart from the 458,000 that left the workforce altogether . Slack work or business conditions accounted for 181,000 of these jobs , while another 77,000 could only find part-time work . Analysts at Goldman Sachs have noticed this trend for some time , and put the blame on Obamacare . “ The evidence suggests that the [ Affordable Care Act ] has at least modestly elevated involuntary part-time employment , ” Goldman Sachs economist Alec Philips wrote in a research note published on Wednesday . Obamacare had the greatest impact on industries that traditionally do not offer strong health insurance coverage , such as retail stores and the hospitality industry . Phillips noted that these have the highest levels of involuntary part-time workers , and believes that the ACA has forced “ a few hundred thousand ” to take cuts in hours or accept part-time work as a result ... As Joseph Lawler noted for The Washington Examiner , the number of people forced into part-time work has grown by over 600,000 people in the last seven months . It ’ s not getting better – it ’ s getting worse .
Faced with the Obamacare-caused dilemma of older and sicker-than-expected insurer risk pools , and the rising financial losses associated with covering that group , the administration is moving to ban a popular form of insurance coverage to try to coerce younger , healthier people to enter the exchanges they ca n't afford . The heavy hammer of regulation swings again :
Short-term health insurance soon could get a whole lot shorter . Federal officials Wednesday moved to improve the financial outlook of Obamacare insurance plans by calling for limits on increasingly popular short-term health plans that are siphoning off healthier customers from coverage sold both on government marketplaces and outside those exchanges . The government 's move would limit short-term health coverage for an individual to less than three months each year and bar renewal , as opposed to the almost 12-month term that some of those non-Obamacare-compliant plans are offering , along with a chance to renew .
I 'll leave you with this bleak Obamacare snapshot out of the battleground state of Colorado :