The reaction among Democrats to popular vote loser Donald Trump 's threat to get them to negotiate with him by crippling Obamacare and throwing millions off of their insurance—immediately—is summed up succinctly by Sen. Ron Wyden ( D-OR ) :
x Strong words from Sen. @ SenateFinance ranking Dem Wyden on Trump 's threat to withhold CSR 's : `` We will not negotiate with hostage takers . '' — julie rovner ( @ jrovner ) April 13 , 2017
In fact , Democrats are so united on this one that they 're willing to threaten Trump back with a government shutdown over these payments .
Democrats say they will make funding for a key Obamacare program a top priority in the next spending bill after President Donald Trump on Wednesday threatened to stop it , raising the possibility of a government shutdown threat over the health care law . [ … ] `` Given the threat , '' a Senate Democratic aide said of Trump 's comments , `` we 'll be pushing for a robust cost-sharing reduction appropriation . '' [ … ] Democrats on both sides of the Capitol are in agreement . Funding for the program `` must be included '' as `` permanent mandatory spending , '' an aide to House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi told POLITICO .
Oh , and it 's not just Democrats who want this funding issue resolved . Some key House Republicans have been working on a way to keep these insurance subsidies flowing , knowing that without them , the markets could start collapsing , and by now being well aware of who 'd be getting the blame for that . Hint : not Democrats . In fact , House Appropriator Tom Cole ( R-OK ) even told reporters that `` he was n't ruling out the use of mandatory spending to cover the subsidies , which means lawmakers would n't need to offset the spending . ''
This is not the Obamacare hill Republicans not to die on—not when even the U.S. Chamber of Commerce is telling them to resolve this issue and make the payments . Between the Chamber—their overlords—and the people who actually have to vote them back in office , Republicans are sweating this one .
So Trump stands almost entirely alone on this , with maybe a handful of Freedom Caucus maniacs behind him . Which makes the Democrats ' threat all the more salient .