The move does not affect the individual mandate . Obamacare rule for business delayed
The Obama administration is postponing the federal health care law ’ s insurance mandate for employers next year , in a major concession to the business community and lawmakers who have become increasingly vocal about the law ’ s potential to damage a slowly recovering economy .
The announcement doesn ’ t affect the main coverage tools in the law — the individual mandate and the new subsidized insurance markets . But it could boost the cost of the law if more people end up seeking subsidies instead of getting covered on the job .
The delay , revealed just as the administration was stepping up efforts to educate the public about enrollment this fall , is at least partial proof of what Republicans have been predicting for months : that the health law is way too complex to be ready to go live in 2014 . And that ’ s a message that may well resonate all through next year - including the 2014 midterm elections .
“ Obamacare costs too much and it isn ’ t working the way the administration promised , ” Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell ( R-Ky. ) said after Treasury announced the one-year delay . “ And while the White House seems to slowly be admitting what Americans already know , and what I hear consistently in my travels around Kentucky regarding the regulatory burden on employers , the fact remains that Obamacare needs to be repealed and replaced with common-sense reforms that actually lower costs for Americans . ”
Speaker John Boehner ’ s press secretary Brendan Buck tweeted simply : “ Obamacare . Such a train wreck . ”
“ Absolutely thrilled by # ObamaCare delay , ” Republican operative Brad Dayspring tweeted . “ Will help # GOP candidates across the board in 2014 . Debate will be a repeat of 2010 . ”
The Treasury Department , which is in charge of the employer mandate , said it recognized that the steps businesses have to take to show they were complying with the rules were complex and a burden . Treasury said it would try to streamline them over the next year .
There will be no penalties in 2014 for businesses that don ’ t cover workers . Most large businesses do cover their workers . Small businesses , with fewer than 50 workers , were already exempt from the rule .
The delay was announced as Washington was already emptying for the July 4 holiday . It comes in the shadow of a mounting pile of criticisms of the employer mandate . There ’ s been a push by some business groups and lawmakers so that only people working 40 or more hours a week would be covered . The health law currently says 30 hours is full time , and some businesses and more recently , school districts , have complained that they would have to cut their employees hours to escape the mandate penalties .
The move is also likely to raise the prices tag of Obamacare by making more people eligible for subsidies , namely those whom employers would have covered under the threat of penalties under the law . Employers with 50 or more “ full-time equivalent ” employees were required under law to provide affordable insurance or else pay $ 2,000 per year penalty per employee .
The employer mandate ’ s penalties were expected to reduce the deficit by $ 5 billion in 2014 , according to a Congressional Budget Office estimate published in February .