More than half of Americans support Obamacare , according to a Gallup poll taken amid floundering Republican efforts to scrap the law after seven years of promising a replacement .
The pollsters said 55 percent now approve of the Affordable Care Act , compared to just 42 percent right after the election .
It is the first time that Gallup found majority support for the law since it started asking about it in 2012 .
People of every political affiliation were more likely to support the law than in November , driven in large part by independents , who ’ ve increased their support by 17 percentage points compared to 10 each for Republicans and Democrats .
However , only a quarter of Americans want to keep Obamacare as it is . About 40 percent want to reform the law , while 30 percent want to repeal and replace it .
Obamacare has consistently split public opinion since Democrats muscled it to passage in 2010 without a single Republican vote , with many polls tilting to the negative side .
In general , Americans tend to like its insurance guarantees and benefits but despise the individual mandate requiring people to hold insurance or pay a tax .
Yet approval ratings have ticked upward of late , as Republicans who control Congress and the White House fail to rally around a replacement plan that can satisfy disparate wings of their own party .
“ Trump vehemently attacked the Affordable Care Act during his presidential campaign — and in the days immediately following his election , the public appeared to agree with him , ” Gallup said . “ However , in the five months since , as Republicans ’ efforts to replace the law with one of their own have failed to get off the ground , enough Americans have changed their minds about the ACA to create a majority favoring it for the first time . ”
House Republicans are trying to revive talks on health reform , though Speaker Paul D. Ryan says the discussions are in the “ conceptual ” phase .
Members of the House Freedom Caucus who blasted the first bill as “ Obamacare lite ” are reviewing a White House idea that would let states apply for a waiver from Obamacare insurance regulations that have been blamed for making coverage more expensive for healthier people .
The waivers would eliminate parts of Obamacare requiring a minimum set of benefits in plans and a provision known as “ community rating , ” which requires insurers to charge the same amount to people who are the same age and live in the same area .
No one ’ s produced legislative text , however , and the proposal could alienate moderates who fear the proposed changes would allow insurers to charge sick people exorbitantly higher prices than healthy ones , even if insurers couldn ’ t technically deny those with pre-existing conditions .
The House GOP ’ s own website says Americans “ should never be denied coverage or charged more because of a pre-existing condition . ”