The GOP has been piling on President Obama over his now-discredited insistence that Americans could keep their existing health plans under the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) .
“ If you like your health-care plan , you will be able to keep your health-care plan . Period , ” Obama said repeatedly , going back to when Obamacare was a bill being argued in Congress . “ No one will take it away . No matter what . ”
That turned out to have been wrong , as millions of Americans found out when they learned that their existing health insurance policies were being canceled because they didn ’ t meet the requirements of the ACA .
But did Obama simply misspeak when he made those assurances , perhaps unaware of some of the details of his own signature program ? Or did he know them to have been false ? Either conclusion does political damage .
Although he didn ’ t use the word “ lied ” on the Republican radio and Internet address Saturday , Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin came down hard on Obama .
“ Those assurances were n't slight exaggerations or innocent shadings of the truth . They were statements that were fully vetted , coldly calculated , and carefully crafted to deceptively sell your health care plan to a trusting public , ” Johnson charged . “ It was a political fraud echoed relentlessly by House and Senate Democrats who should be held accountable for the disastrous consequences of their grand deception . ”
On Sunday , Liz Cheney – daughter of the former vice president and a tea party-favored candidate to oust Republican incumbent Mike Enzi in next year ’ s US Senate race in Wyoming – didn ’ t hesitate to say Obama lied .
On Fox News , Chris Wallace asked her , “ Do you believe that President Obama knowingly lied when he went around the country and promised ‘ if you like your insurance you can keep your plan ’ ? ”
“ There 's no question but that he lied , and we 're all paying the price for it now , ” Cheney said . “ There 's no way he could not have known the truth . There was very clearly a situation in which they were thinking , you know what , the media never hold us accountable , they 're not going to hold us accountable here . ”
Putting aside any motives Obama may have had , what ’ s the evidence that he “ lied , ” as a growing number of elected officials , candidates , and commentators now charge ?
The more liberal view is that “ there is much less here than meets the eye , ” as Dean Baker , co-director of the progressive Center for Economic and Policy Research , put it in Salon the other day .
“ The plans being terminated because they don ’ t meet the minimal standards were all plans that insurers introduced after the passage of the ACA , ” he wrote . “ Insurers introduced these plans knowing that they would not meet the standards that would come into effect in 2014 . ”
“ If the insurers didn ’ t tell their clients that the new plans would only be available for a short period of time , the blame would seem to rest with the insurance companies , not the ACA , ” Baker wrote . “ After all , President Obama did not promise people that he would keep insurers from developing new plans that will not comply with the provisions of the ACA . ”
Not so , critics of Obama say , and they point to evidence they say shows that the White House knew what was coming but disregarded that evidence for political purposes .
“ It turns out that an obscure report buried in a 2010 edition of the Federal Register [ page 34552 ] administration officials predicted a massive disruption of the private insurance market , ” writes Avik Roy on the Forbes web site .
Lisa Myers and Hannah Rappleye of NBC News reported : “ Buried in Obamacare regulations from July 2010 is an estimate that because of normal turnover in the individual insurance market , ‘ 40 to 67 percent ’ of customers will not be able to keep their policy . And because many policies will have been changed since the key date , ‘ the percentage of individual market policies losing grandfather status in a given year exceeds the 40 to 67 percent range . ’ ”
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
“ That means the administration knew that more than 40 to 67 percent of those in the individual market would not be able to keep their plans , even if they liked them , ” Myers and Rappleye wrote on the NBC News web site .