When a DC Circuit Court of Appeals panel released its Obamacare-related decision earlier this week , the Left 's self-appointed `` wonk '' class kicked into damage control overdrive . The three-judge panel ruled that the 'Affordable ' Care Act 's explicit language proscribed the distribution of subsidies to anyone who did not enroll through state-based marketplaces . The fallout of this decision , if it 's upheld down the line , is that consumers in the 36 states served by the federal exchange are ineligible to receive taxpayer-supported tax credits to offset the law 's high premiums . This outcome would wreak havoc on the law 's sustainability . Obamacare 's text could n't be clearer on this particular point , as even the Fourth Circuit Court , which reached the opposite ultimate conclusion , admitted ; the limitation in question appears repeatedly in the legislative language . Many Obamacare supporters have insisted that this was an oversight . A drafting error . A typo . And conservatives raising this point are off their rockers , they sneer . One of the most influential players in this dispute is Jonathan Gruber , an MIT economist who is considered by many to be the architect of the law , and who told the New York Times , `` I know more about this law than any other economist . '' He 's filed amicus briefs in the relevant cases confirming liberals ' assertions that it was never anyone 's intention that only state-based exchange enrollees are eligible for taxpayer subsidies . Arguments to the contrary , he 's said , are `` screwy , '' `` nutty , '' `` stupid , '' and `` desperate . '' In case he was n't making himself clear , Gruber appeared on MSNBC this week and said this :
“ Literally every single person involved in the crafting of this law has said that it ` s a typo , that they had no intention of excluding the 'federal ' states . ”
Literally . He went on to decry suggestions to the contrary as `` criminal . '' QED , right ? Let 's go to the video tape . Here 's Gruber , who `` knows more about this law than any other economist , '' explaining how the law he helped write and promote in 2012 . The clip begins with his recent answer transcribed above , followed by his 2012 analysis :
`` If you 're a state and you do n't set up an exchange , that means your citizens do n't get their tax credits . '' He affirmed conservatives ' argument in 2012 by sharing his own expertise about the law as it 's written . Then , when his own explanation became politically problematic , he reversed positions , shamelessly arguing that `` literally '' nobody had ever intended to make the case that he himself had explicitly laid out . Who 's the `` criminal , '' again ? The Left , gobsmacked by this discovery , cast about for answers , and Gruber gave them one this morning . It was comically pathetic :
I honestly don ’ t remember why I said that . I was speaking off-the-cuff . It was just a mistake . People make mistakes . Congress made a mistake drafting the law and I made a mistake talking about it ... My subsequent statement was just a speak-o—you know , like a typo .
A `` speak-o . '' That 's a new one . He was just confused , you guys . He accidentally said the wrong thing . He was `` speaking off the cuff . '' People make mistakes . But do they make `` off the cuff speak-o mistakes '' repeatedly , and in prepared remarks ? Additional audio from a separate 2012 Gruber speech has surfaced :
`` Finally , the third risk , and the one folks are n't talking about , which may be most important of all , is the role of the states ... Will people understand that gee , if your governor does n't set up an exchange , you 're losing hundreds of millions of dollars of tax credits to be delivered to your citizens . ''
Not only did he offer this analysis at least twice , he emphasized the subsidy `` risk '' as an under-reported , highly important point . This man is a liar . And one of his prominent defenders has also admitted on tape that misleading the public about Obamacare 's contents is justified in order to `` win . '' Prominent Democrats agreed . For the humiliated Left , Gruber has gone from the gold standard witness on this question to an afterthought . Goalposts , shifted :
The ACA was the most debated and discussed piece of legislation in a generation . Find me a legislator saying what Gruber said . Go . — Christopher Hayes ( @ chrislhayes ) July 25 , 2014
Aside from Sen. Max Baucus ' remarks and concerns raised by Texas Democrats about their state rejecting the exchange , this is the best answer to that challenge :
They said it in the legislation , champ . MT @ chrislhayes Find me a legislator saying what Gruber said . Go . — jon gabriel ( @ exjon ) July 25 , 2014
Yep . It was in the bill , for which hundreds of Democrats voted . The House version included broader verbiage , but once Scott Brown got elected , Democrats did n't have the votes to revise their legislation . They had to embrace the Senate-passed bill , which specifically barred subsidies for consumers in states that had n't set up their own marketplaces . One last point : Philip Klein worries that if the court 's decision holds , it will create headaches for Republican governors who will come under intense pressure to set up Obamacare exchanges . You 're heartlessly taking away people 's healthcare ! Ramesh Ponnuru is n't so sure that the politics would cut that way . Democrats are solely responsible for the mess they 've made , and bitter attempts to blame Republicans for the law 's myriad failures have thus far fallen flat .