Underage drinking remains a nationwide problem , but there ’ s one approach that policymakers never consider : banning the sale of most types of alcoholic beverages to adults to keep it out of the hands of youth . That ’ s true even though virtually all liquor that underage people consume was originally sold at retail businesses . They typically get booze from older friends and siblings , who buy it legally .
Lawmakers never propose that “ solution ” because it ’ s wrong to punish all adults for the actions of a small number of them who provide liquor to teens . Some products — alcohol , tobacco , and guns , to name a few — are meant for adults only . Our society can never completely keep such things out of the hands of underage people who want them , but the sensible approach is to enforce laws that ban their sale to and possession by youngsters .
When it comes to vaping products , however , such good sense often is ignored . Various cities , especially in liberal enclaves in the San Francisco Bay Area , have passed new laws that would ban the sale of flavored nicotine products such as menthol cigarettes and flavored e-cigarette liquids . Now Michigan and New York have banned the sale of flavored vaping products — and the Trump administration is using the Food and Drug Administration to ban flavored e-cigarettes .
Those state bans are temporary and done via administrative action in the face of an outbreak of some troubling vaping-related illnesses . Federal health officials say that 380 cases in 36 states of a lung-related disorder are attributable to , or likely the result of , vaping . Seven people have died from the ailment , so it ’ s something health authorities should take seriously . But the cause of the ailment is still unclear , and there ’ s no evidence that any of this is tied to the flavoring in these products .
“ The role of flavored vape products in the current outbreak is unknown at this time , ” reports National Public Radio . “ Some lawmakers and public health advocates have been pushing for flavored vape products to be banned since flavors first entered the market , out of a concern that they appeal to children . The timing of the recent move to ban flavored vape products may be linked to the current public concern about overall e-cigarette safety . ”
This is clearly a case of those who oppose vaping in general using the latest crisis as a means to create a banning frenzy . It ’ s reminiscent of the way that anti-gun legislators use gun-related violence to promote “ emergency ” policies to ban things they want to ban anyway . It ’ s disturbing to see President Trump , whose administration has been largely immune to hysteria-driven public-health campaigns , jump on the bandwagon .
Oddly , California officials have taken a sensible and restrained approach . Lawmakers shelved a bill that would have banned flavored tobacco products . The governor signed a law that tightens up enforcement of e-cigarette sales to teens . He also signed an executive order that “ directs the Department of Public Health ( CDPH ) to launch a $ 20 million statewide digital and social media public awareness campaign to educate youth , young adults and parents about the health risks of vaping nicotine and cannabis products . ”
Even stranger , the Washington Post has been a font of good sense on the lung-disease outbreak . The vast majority of the sick vape users “ reported using a marijuana oil called THC in their vape pens , ” wrote the Post ’ s Paige Winfield Cunningham . “ And many people have started using illegal vape cartridges containing THC , which also contain significant amounts of vitamin E acetate.… The thought is that the vitamin E is behind the symptoms the patients have experienced. ” She wrote that “ marijuana is likely to blame . ”
I ’ m not arguing for a frenzy of bans on marijuana , either , which is a generally safe product ( at least as it ’ s smoked in joints , pipes , and bongs ) . Marijuana is already illegal in most of the places where these illnesses have occurred . It ’ s certainly foolish to ban flavored nicotine-based vaping liquids that might not have anything to do with the illnesses when something entirely different might be the cause of the epidemic .
We also don ’ t know if , say , the illnesses are caused by a faulty product . The medical news website MedPage Today quoted a New York health official who said , “ These were long-time vapers who had recently switched to cheaper THC- or CBD- products purchased from unlicensed retailers. ” So it ’ s possible that the epidemic is tied to black-market sales , which will become even more prevalent if commercial e-cigarettes are banned .
Virtually all vaping liquids are flavored . Banning flavored tobacco amounts to a virtual ban on vaping . Cities and states don ’ t ban flavored alcohol sales because underage drinkers might prefer cinnamon-flavored liqueurs or fruity wines . They don ’ t ban all legal alcohol sales if a bad batch of underground hooch kills or sickens people .
The matter also needs to be kept in perspective . Smoking combustible cigarettes is a dangerous habit , one likely to shave 10 years off of a smoker ’ s life — and lead to costly and debilitating health problems . Vaping is one of the most effective ways to help adult smokers break their deadly habit . In 2016 , the Royal College of Physicians in Great Britain reported that e-cigarettes are 95 percent safer than vaping . More than half a million people die annually from tobacco-related diseases , so vaping ’ s potential health benefits shouldn ’ t be ignored .
Vaping clearly is not without its health risks , and measures need to be taken to keep them out of the hands of underage people , but e-cigarettes need to be available to help adult smokers quit a more-dangerous habit . If cigarette smokers can no longer buy vaping liquids , they may keep smoking cigarettes , which will still be available at their local convenience store .
Young people have been smoking cigarettes , drinking booze , toking marijuana , and vaping in contravention of the law since those substances have been available . The right approach is to enforce current laws and educate children about their dangers . That may not be satisfying amid calls for policymakers to “ do something , ” but it ’ s sensible . That is , unless you seriously think that banning adult sales of wine , beer , and spirits is the best way to combat underage drinking .