Patient , Doctor Groups Say New CBO Score Reveals Health Care Bill 's Flaws
Health care groups that represent doctors and patients are warning members of Congress that the House Republicans ' plan to overhaul the Affordable Care Act would hurt people who need insurance most .
The groups are responding to the latest assessment by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office , which concluded that the proposed American Health Care Act would leave 23 million more people without health insurance than under current law and would cut the deficit by $ 119 billion over 10 years .
The latest CBO analysis came after House Republicans made changes to the bill earlier this month to try to ensure that people with pre-existing medical conditions can still get insurance .
`` Last-minute changes to the AHCA made by the House offered no real improvements , '' said Andrew Gurman , president of the American Medical Association , in a statement . `` Millions of Americans will become uninsured -- with low-income families on Medicaid being hit the hardest . ''
Those concerns were echoed by group after group , including AARP , the American Hospital Association , the American Academy of Family Physicians , the Association of American Medical Colleges and the March of Dimes .
The Republican plan would roll back the requirement under the Affordable Care Act , also known as Obamacare , that everybody has to have insurance . It also would replace the ACA 's income-based tax credits and subsidies with age-based credits that most analysts say are less generous .
Older , low-income people would be hit hardest by the changes , the CBO says , because the proposed tax credits are less generous than those in Obamacare , while insurance for those older than 50 is the most expensive .
As NPR 's Danielle Kurtzleben reported , a 64-year-old making $ 26,500 would pay $ 1,700 in premiums annually under Obamacare . In a state making those `` moderate '' changes to its market under the proposed law , that 64-year-old would pay $ 13,600 , and in a state with no waivers , the cost would be $ 16,100 .
But premiums would fall overall , the report said , because policies would offer fewer benefits and sicker people would leave the market because they would n't be able to afford insurance .
The bill also would roll back the ACA 's expansion of Medicaid . As a result , the CBO analysis estimates that 14 million people would lose Medicaid coverage , which accounts for most of the savings under the bill , $ 834 billion over 10 years .
`` The CBO confirmed the American Health Care Act will further lower premiums , deliver more immediate tax relief for individuals and families , and decrease the deficit , '' said Rep. Kevin Brady , R-Texas , the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee .
But Georges Benjamin , executive director of the American Public Health Association , called the bill `` dangerous , deadly and deeply flawed . ''
He said the proposal , which is now in the hands of the Senate , would eliminate the Prevention and Public Health Fund , which helps promote immunization , smoking cessation and other public health initiatives and makes up 12 percent of the budget of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention .
The CBO reports that the bill could destabilize individual insurance markets in some states , leaving unhealthy Americans unable to buy insurance .
But the CBO also acknowledges that its analysis includes some uncertainty , in part because the AHCA would allow states to get waivers that would exempt their insurers from many Obamacare coverage rules . This includes what are called essential health benefits , a list of medical services , such as mental health care or prescription drugs , that plans are required to cover under the current law .
The CBO estimated how many states might accept those waivers and what they might put in place of the current rules . It figures that states making up about half the population would apply for a waiver of some sort , reducing the benefits that insurers in those state will offer .
`` Services or benefits likely to be excluded from [ essential health benefits ] in some states include maternity care , mental health and substance abuse benefits , rehabilitative and habilitative services , and pediatric dental benefits , '' the report said .
States could also get waivers that would allow insurers to charge more for people with pre-existing conditions , a practice banned under the ACA .
`` Over time , it would become more difficult for less healthy people ( including people with pre-existing medical conditions ) in those states to purchase insurance because their premiums would continue to increase rapidly , '' the CBO wrote .
Republicans argue that by allowing insurers to sell less comprehensive insurance , premiums will fall and more people will buy basic coverage . And their bill includes money for states to create so-called high-risk pools in which people with medical conditions can buy coverage if commercial insurers refuse them .
But two small-business groups , the Main Street Alliance and the Small Business Majority , said the bill could hurt their members , many of whom rely on the individual insurance market for their coverage .
`` Many solo entrepreneurs would likely be forced out of the insurance market entirely . This means many small firms would close up shop while others would never get off the ground , '' said John Arensmeyer , founder of Small Business Majority , which represents 55,000 small businesses .