The number of uninsured Americans is rising again , according to the Census Bureau , an abrupt reversal of a trend of increased coverage since the Affordable Care Act became law .
In 2018 , the number of people in the United States without health insurance rose to 27.5 million , up from 25.6 million in 2017 . The uninsured rate jumped from 7.9 percent in 2017 to 8.5 percent in 2018 . It was the first year-to-year increase in uninsured rates since 2008 and 2009 .
The increase in the number of uninsured is surprising because the US economy has been relatively strong and unemployment has remained low . But the Trump administration has taken numerous steps over the last few years to both hamstring the Obamacare marketplaces for private insurance and to roll back Medicaid enrollment .
The Census data revealed only marginal decreases in private insurance coverage , but Medicaid coverage dropped by 0.7 percentage points , a drop in enrollment of about 2 million people .
It ’ s hard to determine the exact cause for the decline in insurance coverage . President Trump and congressional Republicans repealed the ACA ’ s individual mandate , which ended the requirement that people purchase coverage or pay a penalty . That could have led some people to voluntarily drop their insurance . The administration has also sought to make skimpier “ short-term insurance ” plans more available and it has cut enrollment outreach for Obamacare enrollment .
For Medicaid , the administration has approved the first-ever work requirements , which was found in Arkansas to have led to some 20,000 people losing coverage . The courts have , however , put the requirements in Arkansas and other states on hold , arguing they are contrary to the program ’ s purpose . The administration has also notably sought to crack down on immigrants ’ enrolling in Medicaid , by changing federal “ public charge ” rules so they penalize migrants for utilizing public assistance .
The Census report found persistently high uninsured rates among impoverished in states that have refused to expand Medicaid under the ACA . In those states , which have declined a generous federal match to cover their poorest citizens through the health care law , more than one-third of people in poverty lack health insurance .
Racial disparities also persisted in insurance coverage in America : 5.4 percent of white non-Hispanic people were uninsured , while 9.7 percent of blacks and 17.8 percent of Hispanics lacked coverage .