Brushing aside the impact of automatic budget cuts , President Obama on Tuesday proposed $ 100 million in spending on a human brain research program that he said could develop new ways to treat autism , Alzheimer ’ s disease and traumatic brain injury .
“ As humans , we can identify galaxies light-years away , we can study particles smaller than an atom , but we still haven ’ t unlocked the mystery of the 3 pounds of matter that sits between our ears , ” Mr. Obama told scientists and researchers at the White House .
The proposal , to be included in Mr. Obama ’ s federal budget next week , would boost studies into how the brain works with money from the National Institutes of Health , the Defense Department and the National Science Foundation .
The president said that , in spite of the so-called “ sequester ” budget cuts that took effect March 1 , the nation can ’ t afford to cut back on scientific research .
“ Ideas are what power our economy , ” Mr. Obama said . “ It ’ s so important that we think about basic research generally as a driver of growth , and that we replace the across-the-board budget cuts that are threatening to set us back before we even get started . We can ’ t afford to miss these opportunities while the rest of the world races ahead . ”
The White House has dubbed the program the Brain Initiative ( Brain Research Through Advancing Innovative Neurotechnologies ) , and it follows up Mr. Obama ’ s State of the Union address , where he called for more investment in research and development .
The National Institutes of Health will establish a working group co-chaired by Dr. Cornelia Bargmann of Rockefeller University and Dr. William Newsome of Stanford University to define detailed scientific goals for the NIH ’ s investment and to develop a multiyear scientific plan for achieving these goals .
The president acknowledged that government-funded research projects “ don ’ t always pay off . ”
“ But when they do , they change our lives in ways that we could never have imagined , ” he said , pointing to the Internet and computer chips .
“ Think about what we could do once we crack this code , ” Mr. Obama said . “ Imagine if we could reverse traumatic brain injury or [ post-traumatic stress disorders ] for our veterans who are coming home . What if computers could respond to our thoughts , or our language barriers could come tumbling down ? ”
He said the most promising developments would likely come in the field of medicine .
“ We ’ re still unable to cure diseases like Alzheimer ’ s or autism , or fully reverse the effects of a stroke , ” the president said . “ The Brain Initiative will change that by giving scientists the tools they need to get a dynamic picture of the brain in action and better understand how we think and how we learn and remember . That knowledge could be , will be , transformative . ”