There are at least two notable issues that emerge from this brief clip of Barack Obama ’ s latest remarks on the current fire storm surrounding Jonathan Gruber , ObamaCare and the White House .
First , Obama describes Gruber as “ some adviser who never worked on our staff. ” While that may be technically correct , it would depend on what the definition of “ staff ” is . While Gruber didn ’ t take the pay cut that joining Obama ’ s staff may have cost him , certainly he was specifically sought out and retained by the administration as a key figure in their efforts to pass the Affordable Care Act .
The other issue raised by Obama ’ s comments is significant and pertains to Gruber , as well .
In 2009 , just one month after President Obama took office , the Department of Health and Human Services put out a sole-source solicitation titled “ Technical Assistance in Evaluating Options for Health Reform. ” The contract would be with Gruber , who the document said was the only person “ reasonably available to satisfy agency requirements. ” As the agency put it , “ Dr . Gruber developed a proprietary statistically sophisticated micro-simulation model that has the flexibility to ascertain the distribution of changes in health care spending and public and private sector health care costs due to a large variety of changes in health insurance benefit design , public program eligibility criteria , and tax policy . ”
In the exchange with Fox News reporter Ed Henry , Obama encourages “ every press outlet here to go back and pull up every clip , every story… ” in citing the “ transparency ” surrounding the ObamaCare debate .
However , one doesn ’ t have to try very hard to find clips which reveal the lack of transparency around the debate , most especially as it involves the role of the now controversial Jonathan Gruber . He wasn ’ t even disclosing that he was raking in big bucks from the White House in many of those clips . Consequently , as he was a key source for both the legislation and a major source for the ensuing press coverage , there ’ s no reason to believe anything in and around the Obamacare debate was truly transparent , as Obama tried to claim .
Perhaps that he was speaking today from down under in Australia explains why he seems to have everything upside down right now .