WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - Kentucky on Friday became the first U.S. state to require that Medicaid recipients work or get jobs training , after gaining federal approval for the fundamental change to the 50-year-old health insurance program for the poor .
The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services issued policy guidance on Thursday allowing states to design and propose test programs with such requirements .
Kentucky ’ s waiver , submitted for federal approval in 2016 , requires able-bodied adult recipients to participate in at least 80 hours a month of “ employment activities , ” including jobs training , education and community service .
The Kentucky program also imposes a premium on most Medicaid recipients based on income . Some who miss a payment or fail to re-enroll will be locked out for six months . The new rules will take effect in July , Kentucky state officials said .
“ Kentucky will now lead on this issue , ” Governor Matt Bevin said at a news conference on Friday . “ They want the dignity associated with being able to earn and have engagement in the very things they ’ re receiving , ” he said of Medicaid recipients .
Democrats and health advocacy groups blasted the federal policy on Thursday , saying it would make it tougher for the most vulnerable Americans to have access to healthcare . The Southern Poverty Law Center liberal advocacy group said it planned to file a legal challenge .
The rules apply to those between 19 and 64 years old . Certain groups are exempt , including former foster-care youth , pregnant women , primary caregivers of a dependent , full-time students , the disabled and the medically frail . The Trump administration also said states would have to make “ reasonable modifications ” for those battling opioid addiction and other substance-use disorders .
Kentucky , along with 30 other states , expanded Medicaid to those earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level under the Affordable Care Act , former Democratic President Barack Obama ’ s signature domestic policy achievement commonly called Obamacare .
More than 400,000 Kentucky residents gained health insurance through the program , the highest growth rate of Medicaid coverage of any state .
Among adult Medicaid recipients aged 18 to 64 , 60 percent already have jobs , according to the Kaiser Family Foundation health policy research group . Most adult Medicaid recipients who do not work reported major impediments as the reason , according to Kaiser .
Bevin has said the program had become financially unsustainable under Obamacare , although the federal government covers the majority of its cost . The waiver is projected to reduce the number of people on Medicaid by nearly 86,000 within five years , saving more than $ 330 million .
At least nine additional states , mostly Republican-led , have proposed similar changes to Medicaid : Arizona , Arkansas , Indiana , Kansas , Maine , New Hampshire , North Carolina , Utah and Wisconsin .