Thanks to the Affordable Care Act aka `` ObamaCare , '' President Obama has lost credibility as a leader and effective executive with most Americans .
A good CEO must work within the strengths and limitations of his organization -- then execute effectively to deliver on the promises he makes .
Enter the president ’ s signature program . He told the American people :
- If you can ’ t buy health insurance , the ACA will make it easy to obtain .
- If you like the insurance you have , the ACA will let you can keep it .
- If you like your doctor , the ACA will let you can keep him .
- If you already have good insurance , the ACA will make it cheaper .
The ACA website , HealthCare.gov , even with many efforts at improvement , is simply not easy to use or adequately effective .
As of November 30 , 365,000 Americans signed up for insurance via that website and the other exchanges set up by the states .
This is well short of the administration ’ s target , and makes unlikely that 7 million Americans will sign up by March 31 , as projected by the Department of Health and Human Services .
Many who have failed to participate are young and healthy , and it is their participation that is needed to make the insurance policies offered viable .
When new insurance policies take effect next year , many Americans who successfully navigated the federal website will find they have signed up for nothing at all .
Critical information about policyholders , dependents , incomes and the like has not been effectively transmitted to insurance companies for about one in ten applicants . And the software needed to pay insurance companies federal subsidies promised for low and moderate income Americans is not yet completed .
Doctors will be scrambling to collect money directly from patients , who may not have the ability to pay , and to keep their practices solvent .
Right out of the box , the ACA declared many individual and group insurance policies to be inadequate and illegal .
After a public uproar , the president declared those could be reinstated for one year , but many state insurance commissioners balked at this unworkable reversal of policy . Insurance companies simply can ’ t recreate the risk pools of customers that made those policies viable .
Once out , the jelly could not be put back into the jar .
Across the full range of policies sold directly to individuals and provided groups through employers , insurance companies are eliminating doctors and hospitals from networks to meet arbitrary ObamaCare mandates .
Americans are scrambling to find new physicians , who are often overwhelmed and sometimes can not provide essential services some patients need .
Policies now canceled paid millions of dollars in critical services , including cancer treatments by highly specialized clinics .
Now they are being replaced by new contracts that don ’ t pay for those life-saving treatments , yet are cluttered with unneeded benefits , such as pediatric vision services for childless couples in their 50s .
Sadly , some Americans will literally face death when old policies lapse and can no longer pay for the care they need .
Overall , premium costs are rocketing , not because old coverage was inadequate or new coverage is better , but because the ACA created markets that are less competitive than before .
The ACA sought to create new , more effective markets in over 3,000 cities and counties across America . This is proving an unworkable promise in a health care sector as large as the entire economy of France .
In many locales , owing to uncertainty about size and age characteristics of the new pools of customers to be served , the number of insurance companies participating has declined .
Competitive pressures on insurers to negotiate favorable rates with hospitals and other facilities are greatly diminished .
These insurers are often quoting much higher rates , wholly frustrating the purpose of “ bending the curve ” as the president euphemistically refers to the ACA ’ s efforts to halt the upward trajectory of health care costs .
The ACA is a bureaucratic nightmare and a bad trick played on most Americans
Now the president lacks the trust and credibility to pursue important second term initiatives like immigration reform .