Young adults are not signing up for Obamacare at a rate that could keep insurance premiums from going up , according to an Obama administration report that says nearly 2.2 million Americans have enrolled .
The latest report by the Department of Health and Human Services says only 24 percent of enrollees as of Dec. 28 were aged 18 to 34 , short of the 40 percent goal among a demographic considered vital to making the law work .
Even so , the administration is optimistic that young Americans and uninsured person of all stripes would sign up in time for the March 31 deadline in the Affordable Care Act ’ s inaugural year .
“ The numbers show that there is a very strong national demand for affordable health care made possible by the Affordable Care Act , ” HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said . “ More than six million Americans have now either signed up for private health insurance plans or for Medicaid coverage through the marketplace . ”
About 1.8 million of the enrollees signed up in December , a stark surge after officials fixed software glitches that spoiled the October rollout of HealthCare.gov , a web portal that serves 36 states .
Despite the administration ’ s optimism , GOP critics quickly lambasted the updated figures as too slanted toward older enrollees .
The number of sign-ups through the federal marketplace — nearly 1.2 million — outnumbered those signing up on the 15 state-run exchanges — roughly 957,000 — for the first time since HHS began to report data in mid-November .
Nearly 80 percent of people who signed up for private plans were deemed eligible for financial subsidies from the government to help them pay their premiums , Mrs. Sebelius said .
The new report is notable for two reasons — it comes halfway through the inaugural open enrollment period , which ends March 31 , and it includes demographic data for the first time .
Among the 2 million-plus enrollees , 30 percent are described as aged 34 or younger , a figure that one HHS official described as “ similar to our expectations . ”
But only 24 percent were aged 18 to 34 , according to the report .
“ There ’ s no way to spin it : youth enrollment has been a bust so far , ” said Brendan Buck , spokesman for House Speaker John A. Boehner , Ohio Republican . “ When they see that Obamacare offers high costs for limited access to doctors — if the enrollment goes through at all — it ’ s no surprise that young people aren ’ t rushing to sign up . ”
Young people tend to be healthier , and healthy enrollees are needed to keep premiums in check when sicker consumers with preexisting conditions enter state risk pools , because they can no longer be denied coverage .
Officials said the ratio is appropriate so far and reflects a trend they saw when Massachusetts rolled out its health reforms in 2006 , when young people waited longer to sign up .
“ We expect an increase in the proportion of young adults as we go forward , ” said Michael Hash , director of HHS ’ s Office of Health Reform .
Overall , 54 percent of all enrollees were female and 46 percent male , according to the report .
The Congressional Budget Office projected that 7 million people would enroll in private plans by the end of March , so the pace of enrollment is lagging behind that goal .
On Capitol Hill , GOP critics of the law have shifted from repeated attempts to repeal the law to more nuanced attempts to point out its potential flaws . In particular , they ’ ve suggested that enrollees ’ are putting their personal data at risk on the Obamacare portals .
Republican critics also say the law is disrupting doctor networks that patients enjoy and forcing young people to effectively subsidize sicker consumers ’ care .
They ’ ve also criticized the rate of Medicaid enrollments compared to those selecting private health insurance .
Some of the Medicaid enrollment may be from the “ woodwork ” population that only recently discovered their eligibility , yet under Obamacare more than half the states expanded the entitlement program within their borders to those making up 138 percent of the federal poverty level .
Roughly 3.9 million people had been deemed eligible for Medicaid or the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program through the state-run exchanges as of the end of November , which includes people who renewed existing eligibility and people who were newly eligible . As of Dec. 28 , more than 751,000 have been determined or assessed eligible for Medicaid of CHIP through the federal marketplace .
Monday ’ s report is the third monthly installment released by the Obama administration since the health exchanges opened on Oct. 1 . The administration counted sign-ups through Dec. 28 , and some states could only provide partial data sets .
California ’ s state-run exchange led the way with 498,794 enrollments , while New York ’ s chalked up 156,902 . Among federal-exchange states , Florida brought in 158,030 enrollees , and Texas and North Carolina also recorded more than 100,000 sign-ups .
About 60 percent of enrollees in private coverage selected a silver plan , which offers mid-level coverage in the metal spectrum of plans available on the marketplace . Among the rest , 20 percent selected a lower-level bronze plan , 13 percent selected a higher-level gold plan and 7 percent selected a top-level platinum plan .
One percent enrolled in a catastrophic plan , a figure that is associated with people who lost plans that did not meet Obamacare ’ s coverage requirements in the new year .
Mr. Obama allowed these people to apply for a hardship exemption and purchase catastrophic plans , although health officials on Monday could not quantify how many people had taken this route .