Washington ( CNN ) After more than seven years of campaign pledges -- and 42 days since their initial effort failed in epic fashion -- House Republicans now say they have the votes to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act .
Here 's what to watch Thursday and how they got to this point .
House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy explicitly says yes . House leaders have made crystal clear nothing would be scheduled for a floor vote until they had 216 votes . So do they have 216 votes ? Well , here 's a sampling of GOP aides after the announcement last night .
Here 's the reality : In situations like this , in votes this close , leadership relies heavily on members who make clear they 'd really rather not vote for this bill , but they 'll be there if leaders need them . By all accounts , on Thursday , leaders are going to need them .
So while Republicans are n't going into this vote with 216 firm , happy , `` yes '' votes , they have a handful of members who have given commitments that they 'll be there if they need them . And that , based on the decision to green light the vote Wednesday night , makes them comfortable enough .
Why are they voting now , without an updated Congressional Budget Office score , less than 24 hours after the final amendment text was posted ?
Because they think they have the votes , and when you have the votes , you vote .
Pretty good adage to go by on Capitol Hill : plan beats no plan , votes beat no votes .
Translation : no matter how flawed , something officially on paper , in legislative text , will win the day over some amorphous perfect policy proposal . Similarly , something that can get 216 votes beats something that ca n't .
Seems obvious , but that 's really the explanation . House leaders are keenly aware that the longer this hangs out there , the less likely it is they 'll gain votes . In fact , as interest groups , town halls , the opposition gets a hold of things , it 's more likely they 'd hemorrhage them . So despite not knowing how many people this updated plan would cover , or how much it would cost ( or , in this case , cut from the deficit ) , they 're going to the floor . Votes beats no votes .
On the policy ? No . While GOP policy staff says explicitly they believe the $ 8 billion added to the bill Wednesday is enough to address any concerns raised by states opting out of Obamacare 's pre-existing conditions price protections , there are no shortage of policy analysts and Democrats who vigorously dispute that .
But on the momentum ? Without question . It 's tough to overstate what flipping , in such a public way at the White House , Reps. Billy Long and Fred Upton did for the prospects of this bill . Leadership had run into a brick wall . They were n't going to get the votes . They were staring 2.0 ( or 3.0 ? ) in the face . Flipping two very high profile `` no '' votes , and doing so with a proposal that ostensibly addresses the core of the concerns that have plagued the new proposal up to that point ( giving states the ability to opt out of the price protections in Obamacare ) , was a very big deal .
JUST WATCHED Spicer responds to Kimmel 's monologue Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Spicer responds to Kimmel 's monologue 00:58
It gave leaders something to take to their undecided members . It showed momentum . It gave the appearance that the train was moving and it was time to get on board . It forced the hands of moderates who were keeping their powder dry . It got them to a vote .
`` It gave our guys a clear-cut reason to get to yes , '' one senior GOP aide told CNN .
It 's not homogenous , but for several dozen or so members over the past two days , it essentially comes down to this : the price of doing nothing outweighs the price of doing something that could be politically very unpopular .
This has , believe it or not , long been the argument leaders have made to their members : you campaigned on this . All of you . You ca n't just not do something . Up to Wednesday , that was n't enough . But it was clear there were plenty of members looking for a reason to get to yes , somehow . The Upton amendment got them there .
Also , and the importance of this can not be understated : they 're tired . Members ( and leaders ) are ready to move on . This has been an albatross on the conference for nearly months . It 's time for the Senate to deal with this hot potato . It 's time to get to the next portions of their agenda . ( And it 's time to go home for an 11-day recess . )
What do Democrats think about this process , and the policy behind it ?
`` Everything about this bill , everything about this is a political ad maker 's dream , '' one top Democratic ad maker told CNN .
Making premature proclamations of what lives or dies in Mitch McConnell 's Senate is a bit of a dangerous exercise .
Here 's the reality : there are no shortage of Senate Republicans who were n't angry the House had come up short up to this point . The process had become a political and policy nightmare , one many were more than happy to avoid .
But should the House get this done Thursday , it 's now on the Senate 's plate and there is every expectation Republicans will move on it .
JUST WATCHED Trump talks health care and Mideast peace Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Trump talks health care and Mideast peace 02:33
Just expect it to look very , very different by the time it 's all said and done . House and Senate leaders believe many of the proposed changes to the Obamacare insurance regulations would be stripped out altogether by Senate rules . The structure of the tax credits . The shape of the Medicaid expansion provisions . The future of the infrastructure of Obamacare . The defunding of Planned Parenthood .
These are all issues that will have to be addressed -- and do n't have a clear pathway to resolution .
There have been ongoing , behind-the-scenes conversations between several high-profile senators on opposite sides of the GOP 's ideological spectrum to try and set the stage for what comes next . But even those involved do n't have a great sense of how long it will take to get something done -- if they can at all .
JUST WATCHED Can GOP holdouts be convinced to support plan ? Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Can GOP holdouts be convinced to support plan ? 05:56
Ideally from inside the House chamber , where there will likely be a couple dozen moderate Republican members standing , waiting , staring at the overall vote tally and just hoping they do n't have to vote `` yes '' on this bill . Watch them , and watch how leaders work them and decide who is free to vote `` no '' and who has to walk the plank on this .
Keep an eye on how long the vote is open . How long the vote stands just below the gold 216 mark . And , if by chance leaders push it a few votes above the necessary 216 votes , keep a close eye to see if any members flip their votes back to `` no . ''
There are plenty of lists out there of undecided members , or those leaning `` no , '' and those will all be worth keeping an eye on . But the key is ( and frankly , has always been throughout the last two weeks ) , Rep. Patrick McHenry . He 's the chief deputy whip and is a manic , if absurdly patient , worker of votes . Watch where he goes and who he talks to . That 's the key on who might be wavering , who they need to vote `` yes '' immediately , and perhaps , who has just been freed to vote `` no . ''
Quicker than normal . Keep in mind , the vast majority of the debate on the GOP repeal and replace plan already happened -- on March 24 . Even though leaders had to pull the bill from the floor , the debate on the bill itself had been ongoing all day up to that point . So this will move fast .
And it will also entail a vote on a second bill -- a separate proposal to remove the politically toxic exemption for members of Congress and their staff from the effects of any opt-out of Obamacare 's insurance regulations . It was a provision that was put into the bill in order to be compliant with Senate rules . As such , it 's still in there . This separate bill will be a standalone effort to remedy that .