It ’ s an intra-party struggle that mirrors the party identity fight since Election Day , | AP Photos The GOP split on Obamacare
The next stage of Obamacare is shaping up into a fight between two camps of Republican governors sure to duke it out in the 2016 presidential primary — ideologues versus pragmatists .
The ideological purists are big-name Southern governors — like Bobby Jindal , Nikki Haley , Bob McDonnell and Rick Perry — who have all said “ hell no ” to major pieces of the law , even turning down free federal cash to expand Medicaid in their states .
The more pragmatic governors are rising Republican stars in the rest of the country — like Chris Christie , John Kasich and Susana Martinez — who ’ ve embraced pieces of the law or left the door open to doing so if there seems to be a political upside in their state .
And on Wednesday , they won a big convert to their side : Florida 's Rick Scott , the governor of the state that launched the lawsuit against Obamacare , announced he ’ s going to expand Medicaid under the law — at least for three years .
It ’ s an intra-party struggle that mirrors the same fight that ’ s engulfed the Republican Party since Election Day , pitting anti-Obama hardliners against those concerned with appealing to a broader swath of voters .
And while it ’ s a fight sure to simmer below the surface at the annual National Governors Association ’ s meeting this weekend in Washington — where political attacks are usually reserved for crossing party lines — the rollout of the health care law will continue to be prime testing grounds for the future of the Republican Party in the runup to 2016 .
“ I could see a scenario where [ pragmatists ] get attacked from the right , ” said Republican strategist Ari Fleischer . “ I could also see a scenario where they can carve out a position that they ’ ll always do what ’ s fiscally responsible for their state . It ’ s just impossible to war game it at this point . ”
The purists are being led by Jindal , who has called Obamacare a “ blow to our freedoms , ” and Perry , who insists that “ Texas will not drive millions more into an unsustainable system. ” Both are refusing to either build a health insurance exchange or expand Medicaid .
On the other side are the lead pragmatists : Kasich , the governor of Ohio , and Martinez , the governor of New Mexico .
Kasich is expanding Medicaid , one of the health care law ’ s main tools for covering uninsured people . Martinez is going even further by expanding Medicaid and building a health insurance exchange .
“ I didn ’ t support Obamacare . But it ’ s the law of the land , ” Martinez said in her State of the State address last month . “ The election is over and the Supreme Court has ruled . My job is not to play party politics , but to implement this law in a way that best serves New Mexico . ”
Martinez faces a political landscape pretty unique among her colleagues . She ’ s governing alongside a Democrat-controlled state legislature , and New Mexico has one of the highest uninsured populations in the country . Like her colleagues , though , she ’ s threatening to call off the expansion if the feds pare back their funding commitment .
Even Scott , who was a fierce opponent of the health care law , has become more pragmatic . He asked the Obama administration to let him offer Medicaid through health plans that have tighter controls on costs . When he got that , he agreed to expand the program for three years .
New Jersey ’ s Christie is dropping hints about being a pragmatist , too . He said he wouldn ’ t build an exchange , and on Friday he turned down the chance to set one up in a “ partnership ” with the feds . But he says it ’ s mostly because he couldn ’ t get his questions answered by the feds , not because he hated everything the law stands for — and he even left the door open to changing his mind down the road .