It ’ s weird how science and harm reduction are important lodestars for progressives , except when they aren ’ t .
In the classic 1979 comedy The Jerk , Steve Martin plays a very dumb guy who often misses the point . In one scene , while he ’ s working as a gas-station attendant , an assassin tries to kill him with a high-powered rifle . When the bullets start whizzing past his head and popping holes in some motor-oil cans , he immediately assumes the cans must be defective because they ’ re spontaneously springing leaks . When the sniper is pointed out to him , he then concludes : “ He hates these cans ! ” He then runs past a soda-vending machine , and as the bullets rip into that , he shouts , “ There are cans in there too ! ”
That 40-year-old scene comes to mind in part because that ’ s how my middle-aged brain is wired , but also because I occasionally wonder whether American progressives have a similar feeling about gaseous or vaporous substances . Sometimes I shout at the TV , “ They hate these gases ! ”
Consider vaping . We ’ re in the middle of something close to a full-on moral panic about the practice . The president is considering taking drastic action against the nicotine-delivery systems . New York governor Andrew Cuomo , who recently instituted an emergency ban on flavored vape products , says , “ Vaping is dangerous , period . ”
There are so many bans on vaping and e-cigarettes that Wikipedia has a massive list of all the states , counties , and towns that outlaw the allegedly pernicious devices . It ’ s mostly offices , restaurants , and bars , but you ’ re also out of luck if you want to vape from the deck of a Washington-state ferry .
Now , I sympathize with the effort to make it harder for nonsmoking minors to pick up vaping as a habit . And while I think the bans on flavored vape products aimed at kids will inevitably lead to a black market ( a possibility that many of the same anti-vaping progressives concede when the issue is , say , drugs or prostitution ) , there ’ s still room for reasonable regulations on that front .
It ’ s also worth noting that nearly all moral panics begin with an argument about “ the children , ” yet they rarely end there . Besides , bans on vaping in bars and workplaces aren ’ t aimed at kids anyway .
That said , vaping is almost surely a huge public-health boon because it helps people addicted to cigarettes quit . The National Academy of Sciences , the American Cancer Society , and even the FDA have said that vaping is less harmful than smoking tobacco . My own mother , who tried to quit smoking many times over some six decades , succeeded only when she switched to e-cigarettes .
The recent scare about a mysterious lung disease afflicting a handful of vapers isn ’ t about the standard nicotine products but about the vaping of unregulated THC ( the fun stuff in marijuana ) products .
In almost every other realm of public health , harm reduction is a priority . That ’ s why schools hand out condoms , why various cities give free needles to heroin users , etc . But for some reason , vaping doesn ’ t count , at least not in America . Tellingly , in the United Kingdom , the government is much more supportive of vaping , at least in part because the U.K. has socialized medicine , and replacing cigarettes with vapor saves lives — and money .
Now consider fracking . If climate change or air pollution are like cancer , burning coal is like smoking unfiltered Camels , and natural gas is like vaping . Yes , in the progressive vision of a perfect world , we ’ d kick our addiction to all fossil fuels overnight just like everyone would kick the nicotine habit . But if the aim is harm reduction , fracking has been yet another boon , not only reviving countless economically depressed areas and weaning us off foreign oil but also significantly reducing our overall CO2 emissions .
There ’ s a legitimate debate about how much the drop-off in CO2 emissions is directly attributable to fracking , but no one disputes that it ’ s far better than coal or that coal-generated electricity is rapidly being phased out thanks to the natural gas boom .
And , as with vaping , the response is , “ Not good enough ! Let ’ s ban it ! ” Indeed , Senator Elizabeth Warren is so passionate about the fracking issue , she vows to unilaterally impose an illegal and unconstitutional ban on the practice the moment she ’ s elected . ( I guess Warren thinks she won ’ t need Pennsylvania ’ s electoral votes . )
I understand that progressives don ’ t irrationally hate gases and vapors . If they did , they might be more concerned about the breakneck pace of marijuana legalization . But it ’ s weird how science and harm reduction are important lodestars for progressives , except when they aren ’ t .