WASHINGTON ( ███ ) - U.S. President Donald Trump threatened on Saturday to end government payments to health insurers if Congress does not pass a new healthcare bill and goaded them to not abandon their seven-year quest to replace the Obamacare law .
U.S. President Donald Trump arrives aboard Air Force One at Long Island MacArthur Airport in Ronkonkoma , New York , U.S. July 28 , 2017 . ███/Jonathan Ernst
In a Twitter message on Saturday , Trump said “ if a new HealthCare Bill is not approved quickly , BAILOUTS for Insurance Companies and BAILOUTS for Members of Congress will end very soon ! ”
The tweet came a day after Senate Republicans failed to muster enough votes to repeal parts of the Affordable Care Act , President Barack Obama ’ s signature healthcare bill commonly known as Obamacare .
The first part of Trump ’ s tweet appeared to be referring to the approximately $ 8 billion in cost-sharing reduction subsidies the federal government pays to insurers to lower the price of health coverage for low-income Americans .
The second part appeared to be a threat to end the employer contribution for Congress members and their staffs , who were moved from the normal federal employee healthcare benefits program onto the Obamacare insurance exchanges as part of the 2010 healthcare law .
Trump has previously threatened to suspend the payments to insurers , which are determined by the Department of Health and Human Services . In April , he threatened to end the payments if Democrats refused to negotiate over the healthcare bill .
Responding to Saturday ’ s tweet , Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer said that if the president carried out that threat , “ every expert agrees that ( insurance ) premiums will go up and health care will be more expensive for millions of Americans . ”
“ The president ought to stop playing politics with people ’ s lives and health care , start leading and finally begin acting presidential , ” Schumer said in a statement .
Trump later urged Senate Republicans to try again on a healthcare vote . The Senate is in session for another week before it is scheduled to begin an August recess .
“ Unless the Republican Senators are total quitters , Repeal & Replace is not dead ! Demand another vote before voting on any other bill ! ” Trump said in a subsequent tweet .
Many insurers have been waiting for an answer from Trump or lawmakers on whether they will continue to fund the annual government subsidies . Without assurances , many plan to raise rates an additional 20 percent by an Aug. 16 deadline for premium prices .
With Republican efforts to dismantle Obamacare in disarray , hundreds of U.S. counties are at risk of losing access to private health coverage in 2018 as insurers consider pulling out of those markets .
In response , Trump on Friday again suggested his administration would let the Obamacare program “ implode. ” He has weakened enforcement of the law ’ s requirement for individuals to buy insurance , threatened to cut off funding and sought to change plan benefits through regulations .
Meanwhile , some congressional Republicans were still trying to find a way forward on healthcare .
Senator Lindsey Graham said in a statement issued late on Friday that he and two other Republican senators , Dean Heller and Bill Cassidy , had met with Trump after the defeat to discuss Graham ’ s proposal to take tax money raised by Obamacare and send it back to the states in the form of healthcare block grants .
Graham said the move would end Democrats ’ drive for a national single-payer healthcare system by putting states in charge .
“ President Trump was optimistic about the Graham-Cassidy-Heller proposal , ” Graham added . “ I will continue to work with President Trump and his team to move the idea forward . ”
However , a majority of Americans are ready to move on from healthcare at this point . According to a ███/Ipsos poll released on Saturday , 64 percent of 1,136 people surveyed on Friday and Saturday said they wanted to keep Obamacare , either “ entirely as is ” or after fixing “ problem areas .
When asked what they think Congress should do next , most picked other priorities such as tax reform , foreign relations and infrastructure . Only 29 percent said they wanted Republicans in Congress to “ continue working on a new healthcare bill . ”
Asked what they think Congress should do next , most respondents picked other priorities such as tax reform , foreign relations and infrastructure . Only 29 percent said they wanted Republicans in Congress to “ continue working on a new healthcare bill . ”