Pilots have to undergo random drug and alcohol tests . So do truck drivers . But right now , your doctor could operate on you while high or drunk , and no one would be the wiser .
California could change that with Proposition 46 . The state statute would — among other things — require doctors to undergo random drug and alcohol testing and report positive results to the California Medical Board .
It 's a tough proposal , but one that Stephen Loyd thinks is necessary to protect patients . A physician , associate professor at the East Tennessee State University , and recovering addict , Loyd says he operated on patients for years while high — and it was n't his peers who stopped him .
Prop . 46 is on the state ballot on Nov. 4 , and a recent state poll suggests it has more support than opposition . Fifty-eight percent of respondents said they were inclined to endorse the proposition , and it was opposed by 30 percent of potential voters . To explain why he 's championing the legislation , Loyd spoke with ███ . Here 's a transcript of our conversation , lightly edited for clarity .
Julia Belluz : So what 's at stake here ? Why do we need mandatory drug testing of doctors ?
Stephen Loyd : The easiest way for me to explain what 's at risk is to go back to the airline industry : how comfortable would you be getting on the plane of a pilot who is using narcotics ? None of us would feel comfortable with that . Pilots are subject to random drug screening , and doctors are not . Doctors have the same rate of abuse and addiction as the rest of the population — about 2 percent prevalence at any time , and a lifetime prevalence of 10 to 18 percent . That 's a lot of people . That 's a lot of health-care providers that can have an impact on a lot of patients .
`` In my own substance abuse , i impacted thousands of patients in the years when i was using . ''
JB : Is this kind of screening happening anywhere in the US ?
SL : It 's not happening anywhere . It 's amazing to me that it does n't . We rely on the physicians to police themselves . I support drug testing for physicians because it is a safety-sensitive position , just like an airline pilot , just like a bus driver . A physician can impact many people , maybe not all at once but over time . I can tell you , in my own substance abuse , I impacted thousands of patients during the years when I was using .
JB : So you were abusing while you were treating patients ?
SL : I was on the equivalent of 100 pills a day . The first time I ever used an opiate , I used half a pill . Within three years , I was using the equivalent of 100 Vicodin a day , which is 500 mg of opiates a day . I have n't had anything in over 10 years , and I took those drugs now it 'd probably kill me , but my tolerance then was very high .
SL : The real danger of impaired health-care providers , and the real danger when I was using , was that I thought I was a better doctor when I was on drugs . I overestimated my ability to be a doctor . I felt I did n't need to sleep or eat like a normal person , that my mind was sharper . Those things were n't true . The only thing that prevented me from hurting patients was the competency of the other staff . Any potential errors , they 'd bring to my attention .
JB : Did your peers — other doctors , nurses , hospitals staff — do anything to intervene ?
SL : When I got intervened on , it was n't by my practice or peers or the medical school or the hospitals I worked at . It was my dad . He saw physical changes in me , and he became worried , and he went to my colleagues and to nurses to try to get them to help him intervene . He could n't get any help . He finally showed up at my house one day and confronted me .
`` When I got help , I felt like a guy out in the middle of the ocean drowning and a boat comes by and someone throws you a life ring . ''
When I got help , I felt like a guy out in the middle of the ocean drowning and a boat comes by and someone throws you a life ring . I learned about advocacy programs and high-quality treatment that doctors can get . I look at Prop . 46 way differently than people who are advocating against it . Those people say we do n't want to drug test doctors , that it 's punitive . I say it can save people from a path that will cause them to lose everything they have and potentially hurt patients .
JB : Do you think your peers knew you were addicted ?
SL : Addiction is hidden . Six weeks before I went to rehab , the graduating students at our medical school identified me out of 200 faculty members for having a positive influence on their medical education . I had used drugs in the bathroom during the ceremony . I was a drug-using doctor and my job performance did n't yield a lot of clues , and the whole time I 'm dying a bit on a daily basis . If you drug screened me then , I would have tested positive for opiates I did n't have a prescription for .
JB : There are critics of Prop . 46 — from doctors ' groups to the state Chamber of Commerce . What are their main arguments ?
SL : On the drug screening , they say it 'll cost all this money and it wo n't identify anyone ; that it 's an invasion of privacy . I intervene on doctors now who have substance abuse issues . I can tell you it 's extremely difficult to identify those providers . No one wants to get involved . Peers do n't want to get involved . Subordinates — their incomes and lives are dependent on productivity of the doctor , so it puts people in a bad position . We 've failed at trying to police ourselves . The only recourse we have is to require random drug screening .