While not every state has made its numbers public yet , including California , which is expected to announce enrollment numbers in the tens of thousands later this week , 10 states and the District of Columbia have provided preliminary estimates . All told , about 210,000 people have signed up , about 155,000 for Medicaid and 55,000 others for private insurance plans . Those numbers include people who have picked a plan but have not necessarily paid their first premium , which is not due for another month .
In addition , Oregon has signed up more than 70,000 people for the Medicaid expansion through a “ fast-track ” program that does not rely on the exchange . And Maryland will automatically enroll more than 80,000 newly eligible people in Medicaid in January .
“ It ’ s coming along , ” Patty Fontneau , chief executive of Colorado ’ s exchange , said of her state ’ s enrollment numbers for private plans , which stood at about 3,400 people as of Nov. 1 . “ Would I want there to be more ? Sure . ”
But exchange officials and others emphasized there was a long way to go before much meaning could be read from enrollment numbers . “ We are not even in the first inning of a nine-inning game , ” said Kevin Counihan , chief executive of Connecticut ’ s exchange , Access Health CT. “ For people to throw out all kinds of inferences on success or failure at this point , I think , is really , really naïve . ”
Even states whose websites are working well say they are hampered by a common problem : the federal website , particularly the data hub that checks every applicant ’ s identity and eligibility . That hub has stopped working on several occasions , preventing applications in the states from being completed .
After two such breakdowns recently , officials with Connecticut ’ s exchange , which has worked relatively smoothly , said they would hire an outside contractor to verify identities when the hub fails .
“ We ’ re just trying to make this as easy for the customer as possible , ” Mr. Counihan said .
Other state exchanges that work relatively well also have problems . In California , for instance , the exchange website has yet to offer a complete directory of doctors and hospitals in each new plan network . And some users are still complaining about problems and error messages .