The Affordable Care Act is in deep trouble — in Washington and large swaths of the country .
Senate Republicans began to coalesce around the framework of a plan to repeal and replace the law last week . Their plan would , like the bill the House passed in May , almost certainly cause millions of low-income Americans to lose coverage by ending the Medicaid expansion . It would help the young and healthy at the expense of the older and the sick .
Meanwhile , across the nation , health insurance plans are beginning to flee the Obamacare marketplace . They ’ ve cited the uncertainty around the health care law ’ s future , sown by congressional Republicans and the Trump administration . The number of counties with zero health plans signed up to sell 2018 coverage keeps growing .
The possibility that Republicans will repeal Obamacare or drive it into collapse is an increasingly real one . That ’ s a reality where millions fewer have health insurance and lower-income Americans struggle to afford coverage .
“ Slowly but surely , I think we ’ re gon na get there , ” Sen. John Cornyn ( R-TX ) , the No . 2 Republican , told reporters on Thursday , regarding Obamacare repeal . “ We ’ re coming together . ”
The Senate repeal plan is coming together — and looks a lot like the House repeal plan
Behind closed doors , Senate Republicans have worked out a path toward Obamacare repeal . The plans under discussion would end Medicaid expansion , causing millions of low-income Americans to lose health coverage . They may allow health insurance plans to charge higher premiums to people with preexisting conditions , too .
In other words : The emerging bill looks a whole lot like the unpopular bill the House passed last month . It creates the same group of winners ( high-income , healthier people ) and the same group of losers ( low-income , sicker people ) .
The Republican plan is coming together because moderate senators are beginning to drop some of their initial repeal objections . Sens . Rob Portman ( R-OH ) and Shelley Moore Capito ( R-WV ) , for example , now back a plan to end the Medicaid expansion .
Both were ardent critics of the House bill ’ s deep Medicaid cuts , which would cause 14 million Americans who rely on the public program to lose coverage . Portman put out a harsh statement the day the House passed its health care bill .
“ I ’ ve already made clear that I don ’ t support the House bill as currently constructed because I continue to have concerns that this bill does not do enough to protect Ohio 's Medicaid expansion population , ” Portman said plainly .
But now Portman has endorsed a plan to phase out the Medicaid expansion entirely , just to do so on a longer timeline than the House bill . Portman and Moore Capito want a seven-year phase out , rather than the House bill ’ s three-year off-ramp .
At the end of the day , though , phasing out Medicaid expansion over seven years has the same effect as three years : You end coverage for millions of low-income Americans .
There are still major issues that divide Senate Republicans on repeal . There is disagreement , for example , over how much to cut the Medicaid program and what kind of subsidies to give people in the private market . But the fact that Republicans are coalescing around ending Medicaid expansion — once thought to be a major sticking point — suggests the path to repeal may be easier to find than initial expectations .
Insurance plans are scaling back their Obamacare participation or quitting the marketplace entirely . Most cite the growing uncertainty over the law ’ s future — whether it will be repealed and how the Trump administration will implement it .
In the past week , the number of counties with zero health plans signed up to sell Obamacare has doubled . There are now 38,000 Obamacare enrollees scattered across 47 counties where no insurers want to participate in the marketplaces .
In these places , Obamacare 's coverage expansion could vanish regardless of whether Congress passes a repeal bill . People with Obamacare subsidies would still technically get that help , but would have no place to actually buy coverage .
Anthem announced last week that it would exit the Ohio marketplace , leaving 20 counties and 15,000 Obamacare enrollees with no 2018 option .
Anthem has been lukewarm on the 2018 marketplaces . Reports earlier this spring from analysts who follow the company said it was “ leaning towards exiting. ” But Anthem has decided to stick with a few marketplaces . An Anthem exit in the rest of the states where it currently sells would be devastating to the law , leaving 300,000 Obamacare enrollees without coverage .
When Blue Cross Blue Shield Kansas City quit on May 24 , it blamed the “ uncertain direction of this market . ”
The Affordable Care Act relies in large part on private health plans volunteering to sell coverage on these public marketplaces . There are not mechanisms in the law to force insurers to participate .
“ We elected to have a system that is completely market-based so companies get to make individual decisions , ” says Andy Slavitt , who served as Medicare administrator in the Obama administration .
Under the Trump administration , it has become increasingly difficult for health plans to make the decision to participate on a marketplace that the president says is “ exploding. ” Who wants to build a business around a law that the White House is actively trying to tear down ?
“ The information we ’ ve seen coming from the administration actually creates more uncertainty rather than creating greater certainty , ” says Brad Wilson , chief executive of Blue Cross Blue Shield North Carolina .
Whenever a health insurance plan quits Obamacare , I usually receive an email from the Health and Human Services press office arguing that this is all the more reason Congress needs to repeal Obamacare . This is the statement that spokesperson Alleigh Marré sent out when Anthem quit the Ohio marketplace last Tuesday ( bolding my own ) :
This news is heartbreaking for the millions of Ohioans who depend on access to affordable , high-quality healthcare , and this is a stark reminder that Obamacare is collapsing . Now is the time to advance real healthcare reform that empowers individuals and families with the choices and resources they need to buy a plan that meets their healthcare needs without breaking their budgets . The American people can ’ t afford to wait any longer .
When Republican legislators talk about why they need to repeal Obamacare , they point to the areas that are struggling to attract health insurers . They point to Obamacare 's bald spots and make the argument that a new law is needed to fix the problem .
`` What kind of protection is Obamacare if there are no plans to choose from ? '' House Speaker Paul Ryan said at the Rose Garden ceremony last month to celebrate the House bill ’ s passage .
When insurance executives talk about why they 're leaving , they point the finger back at the uncertainty Republicans are sowing . They don ’ t want a new law ; they want more certainty around existing law . Specifically , they want to know whether the administration will pay for a key subsidy program that it has so far waffled on implementing .
“ The discussion that is happening in Washington , that creates additional uncertainty , ” says Geoff Bartsh , a vice president at health plan Medica , which sells on the marketplaces . “ When you ’ re dangling the cost-sharing subsidies — they ’ re on the table , they ’ re off the table — that creates uncertainty . ”
Insurers ' exits from Obamacare do n't just mean fewer ( or no ) choices for the millions of Americans who rely on the law . They also give Republicans more ammo for pushing their repeal plan forward — and make the path toward passing a Senate bill an easier one to forge .