A new pilot study suggests that signs of autism symptoms can be erased if babies begin therapy even before they can toddle .
Researchers have long taken the `` earlier the better '' approach to treatment , but this tiny study – in just seven children – is the first to look at starting therapy in the first year of life .
The research , run by the University of California Davis ' MIND Institute , provided directed therapy to babies ages 6-9 months old who were identified as having early signs of autism , such as an inability to make eye contact , lack of babbling and fixations .
By the time the seven babies reached their third birthday – a time when autism can reliably be diagnosed – five did n't show any autism symptoms and a sixth had only mild symptoms .
The treatment now needs to tried in many more children to make sure that it can be consistently helpful , said study co-author Sally Rogers , a professor and developmental psychologist at UC Davis .
`` It does n't prove that these children recovered from autism , '' Rogers said , because they were too young to be diagnosed with the condition . But `` it 's a promise of a potential treatment for young children who have these symptoms . ''
It 's not clear , Rogers said , whether the early treatment is better than therapy now generally offered for 3- and 4-year-olds . But it may be that focusing on teaching language to babies at a time when they would normally be learning to speak , for example , will prove more effective than catching children up later , she said .
It 's way too soon to declare this kind of therapy a `` cure '' or even a treatment for autism , said Deborah Fein , a child neuropsychologist at the University of Connecticut , who has researched older children whose autism symptoms disappeared .
Some babies who look like they 're going to have terrible problems simply outgrow whatever was wrong , she said . But she was impressed with the results and said the therapy deserves further investigation in many more children .
Rogers said she and her colleagues are planning a larger study now , to begin as soon as they can line up funding .
The treatment , which is a modified version of a therapy program already offered to older children diagnosed with autism , involves 12 hour-long training sessions for families , directing parents to pick up on their children 's unusually subtle cues .
Not all parents will have the time necessary to partake in the program , said Dr. Lisa Shulman , director of Infant and Toddler Services at Albert Einstein College of Medicine 's Children 's Evaluation and Rehabilitation Center . Some may not have the time , or lack the commitment to parenting a challenging child , she said .
Plus , parents whose children do n't improve with early therapy , should n't blame themselves , she said . `` There will be a group of parents who will say even if my child had been identified that early , I do n't think that would have made a difference . I say as a professional , 'that 's true . ' ''