The Congressional Budget Office analysis of the Republican health care and tax cut bill that passed the House of Representatives last month is full of striking facts . But here ’ s a particularly telling one : The regulatory changes made at the behest of the far-right Freedom Caucus do succeed in yanking insurance coverage from 1 million fewer people than would have lost coverage under the original version of the American Health Care Act .
In exchange , government spending increases by $ 218 billion over a 10-year period — $ 218,000 per additional insured person . That ’ s a lot of money .
To really understand how much money it is , consider the AHCA ’ s provisions related to Medicaid . Here , 14 million people are expected to lose coverage , which ends up saving the government $ 884 billion . That comes out to about $ 60,000 per person — a far lower figure . In other words , if Republicans were willing to spend an extra $ 150 billion to reduce coverage loss by making their Medicaid cuts less savage , they could have earned themselves a far better CBO score on both coverage and deficit reduction .
But to do that they ’ d have to admit something that Republicans seem incapable of admitting : When it comes to health insurance , market-oriented solutions are the most expensive option .
This is a reality centrist Democrats found themselves facing awkwardly when they sat down to write the Affordable Care Act in 2009 .
Moderates liked the idea of subsidizing the purchase of private insurance more than they liked the idea of expanding a government insurance program . But they also liked the idea of spending less money rather than more . And it turned out that on a per patient basis , expanding Medicaid was cheaper than extending subsidies to buy private insurance . Democrats had to choose between their ideological aversion to government insurance and their ideological aversion to higher spending , and ultimately wound up deciding that a hefty dose of Medicaid expansion was a better idea than pushing the spending total up .
But this is exactly the point that Republicans — who are much more averse to federal social spending than even the most centrist Democrat — consistently refuse to acknowledge .
Health care is complicated , but the source of the big government price advantage is not . When the government acts as a giant health care buyer , it either formally through regulation or informally through purchasing power imposes price controls on the sellers of health care services .
The ordinary push and pull of consumer action in a marketplace isn ’ t able to do nearly as well because patients neither can nor want to approach health decisions like ordinary commercial transactions . It ’ s true that a free market approach works well enough for purely discretionary health services like Lasik or breast enhancement surgery , but these are exceptions that prove the rule — medical procedures that don ’ t address core health needs function fine as consumer commodities . Essential health care does n't .
None of which is to say that there ’ s no rational basis for opposing a purely state-run approach to health care . The more market mechanisms you put in place , the more choices consumers will have . More variety gives room for more innovation and more emphasis on customer service .
And , indeed , the higher costs of a private approach aren ’ t necessarily a bad thing . Higher costs for some mean higher profits for others , which ultimate incentivizes more R & D spending and other investments .
But there is a fundamental three-way tradeoff here between the amount of money that you spend , the number of people that you cover , and the extent to which you rely on market mechanisms . What conservative ideologues want to do is choose minimal government spending and maximum reliance on free markets , letting coverage wither in the wind . That ’ s why Michael Cannon of the libertarian Cato Institute launched his “ Anti-Universal Coverage Club ” 10 years ago to try to rally the faithful behind the cause of letting tens of millions of Americans go uninsured .
Practical Republican politicians don ’ t want to go there , however , because it ’ s morally hideous . Nobody who has to face the voters wants to own up to favoring a free market system in which huge swathes of the population can ’ t get care when they are sick . On the contrary , when GOP politicians need to make the case against Obamacare , what they normally do is complain that premiums are too high and coverage isn ’ t generous enough . But there are only two ways to address those issues : lean less on government solutions , or spend more money backed up by higher taxes .
Neither option is acceptable to Republicans , so they ’ re left with the AHCA solution — massive rollbacks in coverage that they try to paper over with a lot of handwaving .