Republicans are five times less likely to say they 've been helped by Obamacare than Democrats — and about half as likely to know someone who has gained coverage through the law .
Those are some of the key findings from the newest Kaiser Family Foundation poll . They could suggest that Democrats really are way more likely to get help from Obamacare — and know way more people getting help , too .
But there 's a simpler , and arguably more plausible explanation of the new data . Political views deeply color impressions of whether the Affordable Care Act is working — or is a miserable failure . Democrats likely overestimate the health law 's reach , Republicans underestimate and the truth is probably somewhere in the middle .
There are two questions in the new Kaiser poll that show huge differences between how many people Democrats and Republicans think the health care law is helping . The first was about whether individuals themselves had been helped by the Affordable Care Act . More than a quarter of Democrats said yes , they 'd been helped , while the number was 5 percent among Republicans .
The second question asked whether respondents knew someone else who had been helped by the Affordable Care Act . Again , there was a big disparity between what Republicans and Democrats saw happening with the people they know .
Republicans , meanwhile , were more likely to say they knew someone who lost their health coverage , or had their hours cut because of Obamacare .
There could be some reasons why Democrats know more people who have benefited from Obamacare . Democratic governors , for example , have been more likely to expand the Medicaid program , meaning voters there would have access to a part of the health care law that is n't available in some Repubican-run states .
But its unlikely that would account for the huge disparities in perceptions of how the health care law is going . Instead , they seem to reflect the more basic fact of whether people like Obamacare or hate it .