Exactly two years ago this week , the Obama administration announced it had issued more than 100 waivers en masse to a select group of companies , unions and other health insurance providers seeking relief from the onerous federal health care law . The Obamacare waiver winner 's club now totals 2,000 . Where are they now ?
Answer : In the same miserable boat as every other unlucky business struggling with the crushing costs and burdens of the mandate .
Among the first and most prominent recipients of the Obamacare waivers for favors were large restaurant chains that provide low-wage , seasonal and part-time workers with low-cost health insurance plans called `` mini-med '' plans . An estimated 1.7 million workers benefit from such plans . Obamacare forced companies carrying such coverage to raise their minimum limits on coverage to no less than $ 750,000 annually . Another Obamacare provision forces all employers to spend at least 80 percent to 85 percent of their premium revenue on medical care .
The social justice Democrats ' goal was to dictate insurance provider spending not just on coverage amounts , but also on executive salaries , marketing and other costs . The regulation punished companies with mini-med plans whose high administrative costs were due to frequent worker turnover and relatively low spending on claims -- not `` greed . '' Complying with the provision would have meant tens of thousands of low-income workers would lose their benefits altogether .
Darden Restaurants , the Florida-based parent company of Olive Garden , LongHorn Steakhouse , Red Lobster and other chains , was a member of the Obamacare waiver early bird special . Their get-out-of-Obamacare card helped spare the company 's health insurance benefits for nearly 34,000 employees . Breathing a sigh of relief that it would allow chains to continue offering all employees access to affordable health insurance , Darden said in a statement in the fall of 2010 that `` the waiver allows us to continue to do that as the various phases of the health care law are implemented . ''
Fast-forward to 2012 . Darden announced last month that it would begin shifting full-time workers to part-time status to save money , cut health costs and circumvent Obamacare 's coverage mandate scheduled for full implementation in 2014 . The move would reduce full-time employees ' hours to less than 30 hours a week ; part-time workers are exempt from the insurance mandate . McDonald 's , another big Obamacare waiver recipient , is considering the same move .
In fact , a survey of members of the Chain Restaurant Compensation Association ( CRCA ) conducted last year by Hay Group reported that a whopping 77 percent of `` quick serve '' restaurant operators said they were considering reducing employee hours to change their status from full-time to part-time . At least one Denny 's restaurant franchise owner in Florida is cutting hours and has openly contemplated an Obamacare surcharge . Jimmy John 's and Papa John 's are also slashing work hours . Applebee 's is mulling a freeze on both hiring and expansion .
`` There 's no such thing as a free lunch '' is a race-neutral truth . But economically illiterate Obama supporters have now called for boycotts of these businesses and accused them of vengeful `` racism '' against the president . Instead of sympathy and gratitude for private businesses trying to do right by their workers , customers and shareholders , the corporate-bashers inundated Twitter this week with profanity-laced condemnations of the restaurant service industry . One protester tweeted : `` @ Applebees Your CEO is a racist piece of ( redacted ) , he not hiring because Obama was elected ... U WILL LOSE CUSTOMERS . ''
`` Red Lobster , Olive Garden ( are ) using Obama re-election as an excuse to deny employees benefits and living wages , '' Jon Marquis fumed .
Twitter user Daphine Walker sent unhinged , ungrammatical messages to Red Lobster and Olive Garden in all-caps : `` I WILL NEVER SPEND ANOTHER CENT ON THIS RACIST COMPANY WHO DOESNT GIVE A DAMN ABOUT THEIR EMPLOYEES . ''
The CEO of Red Lobster and Olive Garden is black . But no matter . Regardless of the actual facts , economic realities and entirely predictable and inevitable consequences of command-and-control government mandates , it 's always about identity politics for the Obama grievance mob . In good times and bad , the left never grants waivers from the race card .