Jimmy Kimmel doesn ’ t want to be talking about health care so much , but here he is , smack dab in the middle of a debate he very obviously hates .
On September 20 , during his monologue , Kimmel took a breath in the middle of trying to explain the ramshackle Graham-Cassidy health care bill currently up for consideration in the Senate , and looked out at his audience . “ Listen : Health care is complicated , ” he said . “ It ’ s boring . I don ’ t want to talk about it . The details are confusing — and that ’ s what these guys are relying on . They ’ re counting on you to be so overwhelmed with all the information [ that ] you just trust them to take care of it . Well , they ’ re not taking care of you . They ’ re taking care of the people who give them money . ”
On September 21 , Kimmel went a step further , Listing yet again the many , many medical associations that have come out against the Graham-Cassidy bill , Kimmel threw up his hands and said , `` We have n't seen this many people come out to speak against a bill since Cosby . ”
Strong words , but not anything that people who have been watching Kimmel lately can be surprised by , after months of the late-night host slamming each and every frantic Republican effort to repeal and replace Obamacare . After Kimmel ’ s newborn son required open-heart surgery in April , the host realized that if Obamacare were repealed , lifetime caps on health care spending could return , and his family — and so many others — could get screwed by having to spend thousands of dollars out of pocket to ensure their loved ones are cared for . At the time , Kimmel gave an impassioned , tearful monologue about making sure his son received the care he needed and about just how important it was that his family had reasonable health insurance .
That monologue became an instant sensation , getting the attention of not just his viewers and angry people on the internet but also the very Republican senators he was calling out for holding people ’ s lives in the balance . Sen. Bill Cassidy even appeared on Jimmy Kimmel Live afterward to define “ the Jimmy Kimmel test ” for future health care legislation , which would mandate that the bill ensure that “ no family should be denied medical care , emergency or otherwise , because they ca n't afford it . ”
Now , however , Cassidy is trying to push through an extreme new health care bill that would turn over incredible responsibility to the states and , essentially , blow up the health insurance system as we know it — and Kimmel , who before this has never made biting political commentary his comedic bread and butter , doesn ’ t want to let him get away with it . This week alone , he gave three searing monologues about the Graham-Cassidy bill , refusing to blink in the face of Republicans telling him to sit down , shut up , and let “ the experts ” handle it .
“ I never thought I ’ d get involved in something like this , ” Kimmel said on September 19 , dumbfounded . “ This is not my area of expertise . My area of expertise is eating pizza , and that ’ s about it . But we can ’ t keep letting them do this to our children , our senior citizens , our veterans , or to any of us . ”
This blatant hypocrisy has him pissed , sure , but even more than that , he seems just plain fed up with the whole ordeal . All three of his monologues this week make clear that he would love to drop the sincere pleas and keep making people laugh . But as he sees it , the overall cruelty of these health care proposals — which affect him personally — gives him no choice but to return to the same dry subject over and over again .
Before his son ’ s surgery , Jimmy Kimmel preferred to dabble in politics rather than diving in face first
Prior to President Trump taking office , Jimmy Kimmel Live would take on politics from time to time , though never in earnest monologues like the one that put Kimmel at the forefront of the health care discussion . Instead , the show tended to approach politicians with the same instinct it applied to uninformed people wandering down Hollywood Boulevard : wryly pointing out how stupid they could be . For a long while , in fact , Kimmel was best known as the late-night host who would spotlight a ridiculous viral video — like 2013 ’ s “ Worst Twerk Fail EVER - Girl Catches Fire — only to reveal himself as the puppet master behind it .
Since Jimmy Kimmel Live debuted in 2003 , the vast majority of the show has been devoted to snarking on pop culture , putting on live concerts , and making ABC happy with constant analysis of the Bachelor franchise . Kimmel pulls pranks and highlights other people ’ s pranks when they manage to impress him . He puts people on the spot with sporadic games , which can be fun and loose or veer into something a little crueler ( e.g. , “ Foreigner Or Not ? ” ) .
But over the past several months , even some of his more overtly silly regular segments have found sharper political teeth . “ How Many Americans Know Where North Korea Is ? ” forced people on the street to face the fact that they had strong opinions about a country they know almost nothing about . His signature “ Celebrities Read Mean Tweets ” segment recently got a cheeky remix into something a little more pointed , when he read “ Mean Comments From Trump Supporters ” after he got flak for a particularly critical monologue he did after the violent white supremacist rally in Charlottesville , Virginia .
Like most late-night hosts this year , Kimmel has found himself unable to turn away from politics — or , more accurately , the bizarre reality that is President Donald Trump . And when his son was born earlier this year and almost immediately required three open-heart surgeries , Kimmel was unable to ignore the issue that had presented itself in such a horrific way on his doorstep .
So he didn ’ t — and he launched himself into the conversation with unprecedented candor that took almost everyone , perhaps especially himself , by surprise .
This honest , vulnerable Kimmel wasn ’ t like any iteration of himself he ’ d shown viewers before . Kimmel — who first came up in comedy through co-hosting The Man Show with Adam Carolla — usually delivers punchlines with a bemused-seeming laugh that masks their acidic sarcasm . He ’ s like the quickest guy in the frat , with a mean streak matched only by his fierce affection for those he cares about .
But it ’ s exactly that affection — or , perhaps more accurately , loyalty — that ’ s forced Kimmel to step outside his comfort zone and face something as serious as health care head on . Having an issue hit this close to home has made it impossible for him to ignore or shrug off political news . So he keeps coming back to this dry issue time and time again , even when he barely has any jokes to tell about it .
And while some have criticized him for “ politicizing ” his son ’ s condition , Kimmel addressed them too , pain spiking his indignant delivery on September 19 . “ I want you to know , ” he said , “ that I am politicizing my son ’ s health problems , because I have to . ”
But of course , Kimmel doesn ’ t have to do anything . The difference with his approach to this particular issue , it seems , is that he wants to .
The defining characteristic of Kimmel ’ s take on politics isn ’ t anger but exasperation
Even as Kimmel leans more into covering the news of the day with increasingly pointed jokes , his instinct has never been to explode in righteous rage . In fact , he doesn ’ t express his horror about political developments — which has grown more and more obvious over the course of Trump ’ s first year in office — quite like anyone else in late night .
Stephen Colbert and Samantha Bee launch weaponized jokes from a baseline of anger ; John Oliver sputters panicked warnings ; Seth Meyers and Trevor Noah impart the gravity of their words with grim deadpans . Kimmel may very well feel angry , panicked , and grim , especially in the face of Republicans ’ ongoing attempts to repeal and replace Obamacare . More than anything , though , the main emotion he conveys while tearing into political hypocrisy is complete and utter frustration . Like he said : He doesn ’ t want to be talking about this at all .
But Kimmel has found himself at the center of an ugly fight for the heart of American health care — and to his credit , he ’ s going to fight for it as best he can while he ’ s there .