The Internal Revenue Service , the federal agency almost everyone loves to hate , and the scandal surrounding it may have some significant traction , particularly because the IRS will be deeply involved in overseeing a major part of the Affordable Care Act , known unofficially as “ Obamacare . ”
A few news organizations have connected the dots , but not many . The IRS official mainly responsible for targeting conservative groups in the scandal , Sarah Hall Ingram , will head the office in charge of enforcing the health insurance requirements beginning in January .
The IRS is an agency everyone has to deal with — even more so when Obamacare kicks in . We pay our money there for our taxes and many will see the IRS enforce the mandate for their health care .
• Nearly a year ago , Deputy Treasury Secretary Neal S. Wolin met with IRS Inspector General J. Russell George about whether conservative groups had been targeted . Mr. George eventually determined they were .
• In April , the Treasury Department told White House counsel Kathryn Ruemmler that IRS employees wrongly targeted conservative groups seeking nonprofit tax status .
• The information was shared with senior White House staff , including Chief of Staff Denis McDonough , who decided not to inform Mr. Obama because the investigation wasn ’ t finished until May 14 .
Plausible deniability for the president ? Perhaps , but what was going on was known at the highest levels of the Obama White House . Although Mr. Obama has condemned the IRS and sacked its head , he said he did not know about the inspector general ’ s report . That ’ s different from knowing about the scandal itself . That ’ s something the president needs to address .
In a rather bizarre story last week , The New York Times chastised the media , Rush Limbaugh and Mitt Romney for pushing other agendas that failed to give the IRS more scrutiny during the 2012 campaign .
Whatever the case , it ’ s time for the media to look at the connections between the IRS and Obamacare because the potential for abuse may be even greater than the outrageous actions toward conservative groups .
The IRS will oversee 47 tax provisions of the health care law . These include imposing penalties against individuals who don ’ t get insurance , determining how to provide subsidies to an estimated 18 million people who may qualify for government help and taxing people who make more than $ 200,000 a year on their insurance plans . The IRS said it needs a budget increase of $ 13 billion a year or so , including the addition of about 2,000 new agents . All of the above certainly scare me .
Many in the media think Obamacare is a good idea . But the public still has buyer ’ s remorse . A recent CNN poll found 54 percent opposed the program and 43 percent supported it .
Is the IRS an agency we can trust after its political motivations became known ? It looks unlikely after congressional testimony , which included one of its top administrators invoking the Fifth Amendment .
What the IRS did was unconscionable . It ’ s important to look at the past , but it ’ s also important to look toward the future . The IRS and Obamacare provide a potentially toxic mix for abuse . That is what Congress and the media also need to investigate .
• Christopher Harper is a professor at Temple University . He worked for more than 20 years at The Associated Press , Newsweek , ABC News and “ 20/20. ” He can be contacted at [ email protected ] Follow him on Twitter @ charper51 .