Earlier this week , Bernie Sanders ’ s senior campaign adviser David Sirota sent an email to Sanders supporters drawing attention to a speech in which Joe Biden spoke favorably of cuts to Social Security and Medicare . “ Paul Ryan was correct when he did the tax code , ” Biden said in 2018 . “ What ’ s the first thing he decided we had to go after ? Social Security and Medicare . We need to do something about Social Security and Medicare . That ’ s the only way you can find room to pay for it. ” The fact-checking website PolitiFact took issue with Sirota ’ s interpretation of these remarks . PolitiFact insisted that Biden was being sarcastic , as apparently evidenced by the fact that he leaned forward and whispered the last bit . But as the Intercept ’ s Ryan Grim pointed out , Biden does that whispering thing a lot . He usually does it when he ’ s “ speaking forbidden , politically incorrect truths to the Left , ” not when he ’ s being sarcastic . Furthermore , Grim observed that later in the same speech Biden says that Medicare and Social Security “ can stay , it still needs adjustments , but can stay ” — adjustments being DC-speak for cuts . Grim ’ s points are well taken . But we don ’ t need to perform an exegesis on a single recent speech in order to nail down what Joe Biden thinks about Social Security and Medicare . He ’ s been in the public eye for a long time , and spent most of it proudly identifying as a Third Way Democrat , a political current that has boldly pursued austere cuts to social programs while authorizing tax breaks to the wealthy . So why don ’ t we just take a look at Biden ’ s record ?
Joe Biden vs. “ Those Sacred Cows ” In his original email , Sirota linked to a video of a 1995 speech Biden gave on the Senate floor in which Biden says : When I argued that we should freeze federal spending , I meant Social Security as well . I meant Medicare and Medicaid . I meant veterans benefits . I meant every single solitary thing in the Government . And I not only tried it once , I tried it twice , I tried it a third time , and I tried it a fourth time . Somebody has to tell me in here how we are going to do this hard work without dealing with any of those sacred cows . After being taken to task by PolitiFact , Sirota unearthed and circulated yet another video in which Biden says to the Senate , “ I tried with Senator Grassley back in the eighties to freeze all government spending , including Social Security , including everything. ” Biden was telling the truth about his own record . In 1984 , he teamed up with two Republican Senators to put a freeze on Social Security spending , which specifically would have eliminated scheduled cost-of-living increase for seniors enrolled in the program . That is by definition a cut to the program . “ While this program is severe , it is the only proposal that will halt the upward spiral of deficits , ” he said at the time . In the eighties Joe Biden also called to raise the retirement age , a proposed cut to Social Security and Medicare alike . And if you thought that was just youthful folly , think again . In 1995 , Biden voted again for a balanced-budget amendment that took special aim at Social Security , citing concerns about “ continued spending ” for his decision . Nor did those attitudes stay behind in the twentieth century . When Biden ran for office in 2007–8 , he again proposed raising the retirement age . When asked whether he would consider cuts to Social Security and Medicare he responded , “ The answer is absolutely … you ’ ve got to put all of it on the table. ” When Joe Biden became vice president under Barack Obama , he was unsurprisingly keen to do just that . Throughout his tenure Biden routinely “ displayed his friendliness to GOP entitlement hawks , ” writes Branko Marketic in In These Times . Marketic recounts how Biden appointed a proponent of Social Security privatization to the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility . “ The Simpson-Bowles Commission , as it came to be known , recommended cuts to Medicare , Medicaid and Social Security. ” Biden then took the lead on tax policy negotiations where , Marketic writes , his “ eagerness to cut a deal with the Republicans sometimes elicited outrage from his fellow Democrats , who felt he was giving too much away. ” Again , Biden repeatedly placed Medicare and Social Security in the crosshairs in these negotiations . Biden then went on to lead debt negotiations , Marketic writes , proposing “ $ 2 trillion in cuts to general spending , federal retirement funds , Medicare and Medicaid … At one point , Biden suddenly called for $ 200 billion more in cuts that had never been discussed. ” The deal was eventually scuttled , but Biden had proven himself willing to give it all away , and then some .