Far from proving that the administration has “ sabotaged ” Obamacare , new Census Bureau data provide compelling support for the president ’ s actions .
The latest Census Bureau survey shows a sizable increase in the number of Americans without health insurance . The number of uninsured climbed from 25.6 million in 2017 to 27.5 million in 2018 . Only two demographic groups saw significant declines in coverage : 1 ) people in Medicaid-expansion states with incomes below the poverty line ( about $ 25,000 for a family of four ) and 2 ) people with incomes above 400 percent of the poverty line ( about $ 100,000 for a family of four ) .
Democrats were quick to argue the Trump administration is sabotaging Obamacare . The truth is that the administration has worked aggressively to increase options for affordable health care and address Obamacare ’ s failings . In fact , the Census Bureau numbers are further proof that the administration has taken the correct actions to date .
Just before Obamacare took effect , government experts projected it would lead to nearly 30 million people being insured in the individual market by now . The new exchanges were supposed to offer attractive coverage . At the time , there were around 11 million people covered in the individual market , so the projected increase was substantial . But Obamacare pushed up costs dramatically and caused insurers to leave markets . Rather than 30 million enrollees , only about 14 million enrolled — many of them shoved out of the plans they liked . Nearly 70 percent of those enrolled now receive huge subsidies to afford their expensive policies , and millions of middle-income Americans who don ’ t qualify for subsidies have been priced out of the market . Federal taxpayers now are paying more than $ 50 billion a year in Obamacare subsidies , and new individual-market enrollment is up only about 3 million people .
Obamacare contains a major incentive for people to wait until they need health care to purchase coverage . People can buy insurance after they are sick and still get the same rates as healthy people . Others stop paying premiums in the fall and , because of Obamacare ’ s design , can stay covered for the rest of the year . As they ’ ve learned more about how Obamacare works , it should not be surprising that more people have figured out how to game the system , causing higher premiums for others .
The number of uninsured Americans in households with income above 400 percent of the poverty line increased by 1.1 million from 2017 to 2018 , and the number of uninsured in households with income above 300 percent of the poverty line — about $ 75,000 for a family of four — increased by 1.6 million . ( Most other income groups saw small year-over-year changes in the number of uninsured . ) These are people in the middle class , often without an offer of employer coverage , who are playing by the rules and simply can ’ t afford Obamacare plans since they don ’ t qualify for a subsidy — people the Trump administration ’ s health-care reforms are designed to help .
Last year , for example , the administration reversed an Obama-era policy that severely restricted the ability of people to purchase short-term insurance coverage . The new rule gives Americans the ability to purchase more-affordable plans that allow their families to get insurance if they , say , lack workplace coverage , decide to further their education , or retire early .
The administration has made it easier for small businesses to band together and obtain the same advantages that large employers receive in offering insurance . Unfortunately , a dozen Democratic attorneys general are leading a lawsuit to against this rule change , but the administration is fighting back in the courts .
The administration has reversed another Obama-era policy to allow employers to make tax-free contributions to reimburse workers who purchase policies in the individual market . The administration estimates that in five years , 800,000 employers — nearly 90 percent of them with fewer than 20 workers — will offer these “ Health Reimbursement Arrangements , ” covering more than 11 million people . Far from sabotaging the individual market , this will increase its size by an estimated 50 percent and reduce the number of uninsured by nearly 1 million .
Finally , the administration has approved several waivers allowing states to redirect money to finance care for those with expensive health conditions . The states that got these waivers had an average premium reduction of nearly 8 percent , compared to an average premium increase of 3 percent in other states .
The vast majority of Obamacare ’ s coverage gains have been achieved by putting able-bodied adults on Medicaid — traditionally a welfare program for the disabled and lower-income children , pregnant women , and some seniors . States that adopted the law ’ s Medicaid expansion witnessed a surge in enrollment . Unfortunately , many enrollees have incomes well above eligibility thresholds . Recent research shows that 2.5 to 4 million people may have been wrongly enrolled in Medicaid in 2017 . Since 2017 , states have had to bear a small , but growing , share of the expansion cost . Some are finally checking eligibility and removing people who are ineligible , which likely contributed to the 2 million–person decline in Medicaid enrollment from 2017 to 2018 . It is especially notable that coverage among people below the poverty line in Medicaid-expansion states declined by 1.5 percent . Americans in this group are eligible for what is essentially “ free ” coverage through Medicaid , but a growing number of them are not enrolling — an indication of the low value placed on the coverage . They should not be thought of as uninsured in a practical sense , because they can generally enroll for coverage in the program after they receive services .
In the end , the Trump administration has expanded affordable options that will significantly increase the number of people with insurance , including individual-market Obamacare coverage . Far from proving that the administration has “ sabotaged ” the law , the Census Bureau ’ s new data provide compelling support for the president ’ s actions .