There was once a time – five months ago , to be precise – when the big fear surrounding the Affordable Care Act was that it would cause health insurance premiums to “ skyrocket. ” That , at least , was the terminology the Hill used in a headline for a story on its health policy blog , which quoted a handful of anonymous insurance executives in reporting that “ ObamaCare-related premiums will double in some parts of the country , countering claims recently made by the administration. ” The Hill ’ s report was eagerly shared and promoted by conservative and Republican opponents of the ACA , who waved it around as proof that the law was a disaster .
Despite all the fanfare , there was little reason to believe the Hill ’ s reporting . The ACA ’ s first open enrollment period was still going at that point , so there was no way to know how many Obamacare enrollees there were , their ages , their health status – all factors that go into calculating rate increases . Getting a better picture of what the rate adjustments for 2015 would like required waiting , and patience .
Well , now we ’ re starting to see the picture develop , and it looks very different from the 100-percent increases conservatives were secretly ( or overtly ) hoping for just a few months ago . PricewaterhouseCoopers put together a “ preliminary look at 2015 individual market rate filings , ” and they found that , for the 27 states for which data are available , the average premium increase will be 7.5 percent . It ’ s all preliminary , of course , but it ’ s a hell of a lot better than the Hill ’ s citation of a former insurance executive ’ s “ gut ” feeling . The New Republic ’ s Jonathan Cohn writes that “ the experts I consulted all saw the available information as relatively encouraging , particularly in comparison to what many were predicting just a few months ago . ”
So where are conservatives looking for proof that the Affordable Care Act is not living up to its moniker ? Florida . The Miami Herald reported earlier this week that “ Floridians who buy health insurance on the individual market for next year will face an average increase of 13.2 percent in their monthly premiums , according to rate proposals unveiled Monday by the state ’ s Office of Insurance Regulation. ” That isn ’ t anywhere near the “ skyrocketing ” that Republicans assured us was coming , but 13.2 percent would qualify as a “ double-digit rate increase , ” and conservatives were quick to point that out . ( Consumer health advocates in the state accused regulators of employing a flawed methodology , as the Herald notes . )
One loud critic of the Florida premium increase is the state ’ s Republican governor , Rick Scott , who said in a statement that “ Obamacare is a bad law that just seems to be getting worse , ” and “ Florida families are going to be slammed with higher costs . Obamacare has failed to live up to its promises in nearly every way. ” That ’ s an audacious statement for Scott to make , given that he and the Republican-controlled Florida Legislature did everything in their power to make it as difficult as possible for the Affordable Care Act to function in the state . They set out to sabotage the law , and now they ’ re trying to score political points off the fruits of their sabotage .
Florida was one of the many states that refused to expand Medicaid and refused to build their own health insurance exchange . But Rick Scott went a step further and turned the state into a laboratory of anti-Obamacare activism . He and the state Legislature passed a law last June that temporarily suspended the ability of state regulators to negotiate with insurance companies on premiums for individual insurance plans . At the time , Democratic Sen. Bill Nelson accused Scott of doing pretty much exactly what he ’ s doing right now : “ Nelson … contended in his veto request that legislators removed state rate regulation in order to blame the health care overhaul if rates go up . ”
Scott ’ s opposition to Obamacare and his commitment to its failure were such that he actively worked against the interests of his constituents . He and the Legislature passed another law in 2013 that “ made it more difficult for Floridians to obtain the cheapest insurance rates under the exchange and to get help from specially trained outreach counselors. ” All this despite the fact that Florida , at the time of the ACA ’ s rollout , had the second highest uninsurance rate in the country .
Generally speaking , Obamacare is performing well in the states that embraced the law , and not as well in the states that rejected expanded Medicaid and declined to build their own insurance exchanges . It ’ s a simple bit of cause-and-effect logic : cooperation with Obamacare produced better outcomes , while opposition made the law less effective . But the Republicans and conservatives who fought desperately against the law ’ s success are now professing to be absolutely shocked and appalled that the Affordable Care Act isn ’ t able to fully make good on its promises . That 's about as disingenuous an argument as you can make .