The White House scrambled Wednesday to find solutions for the glaring failures in Obamacare as rebellious congressional Democrats pressured the administration over their increasing political predicament .
In a closed-door meeting at the Capitol , House Democrats blasted administration officials over their handling of the Obamacare rollout , and the White House ’ s failure to address Mr. Obama ’ s broken promise to Americans that they could keep their health insurance plans .
Top Senate Democrats , meanwhile , were giving more support to a legislative proposal that would allow people to keep their insurance plans . The White House said the proposal from Sen. Mary L. Landrieu , Louisiana Democrat , has more merit than a House Republican plan scheduled for a vote Friday .
White House press secretary Jay Carney said the president is trying to reassure congressional Democrats that he will decide on a solution “ sooner rather than later . ”
“ The frustration that Democrats who strongly support the Affordable Care Act and who strongly believe that it is the right thing to do … [ feel ] is similar to the frustration the president feels , ” Mr. Carney said . “ Nobody is satisfied . ”
SEE ALSO : Only 106,000 : Obamacare enrollment falls far short of goal
The reasons for the Democrats ’ rising anger are clear . With website glitches and millions of constituents receiving insurance cancellation notices , lawmakers who supported the president ’ s health care reform plan are feeling more vulnerable about their re-election prospects next year , and many who fought for Obamacare are worried that its promise is being threatened by incompetence .
A Quinnipiac University poll released Wednesday showed that congressional Republicans have erased a 9-point deficit in six weeks in a generic congressional ballot question , and are running even with Democrats . One of the main developments in the past six weeks was the rollout of Obamacare on Oct. 1 .
Some Democrats say they were emboldened by former President Bill Clinton ’ s call Tuesday for Mr. Obama to make good on his “ you can keep-your plan ” promise even if it required legislative changes to the health care law .
Among the lawmakers who challenged administration officials in the private meeting , Democrats said , were Rep. Michael F. Doyle , Pennsylvania Democrat , and Rep. Anna G. Eshoo , a close ally of Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi , a fellow California Democrat . Administration officials taking the brunt of criticism were David Simas , deputy senior adviser to the president , and Mike Hash , director of the Health and Human Services Department ’ s office of health care reform .
The most urgent political challenge for House Democrats is scheduled for Friday , when they will have to vote on a plan by Rep. Fred Upton , Michigan Republican , that allows people to keep health care policies they like . Several lawmakers warned the administration officials that the White House must offer them a way out of the predicament before that vote .
Mr. Carney said the Upton bill isn ’ t acceptable because it would “ allow insurers to sell new plans that were substandard , that did not meet the minimum benefit standard of the Affordable Care Act , and thereby potentially undermine … the central promise of the Affordable Care Act . ”
Senate Democrats are scheduled to meet Thursday at the White House to urge the administration to come up with a solution .
Asked about the Quinnipiac poll ’ s findings that a majority of Americans for the first time find Mr. Obama untrustworthy , Mr. Carney said Washington as a whole is suffering from the fallout of the government shutdown and other failures .
“ There is no question that the dysfunction in Washington that the American people have seen is taking its toll on everyone , ” Mr. Carney said . “ And while the president ’ s ratings are low for him , they ’ re sky high in comparison with Congress , and in particular Republicans in Congress . That ’ s not satisfactory to us , only because it reflects a feeling among the American people that this place is not working for them . ”