When the sun rises over the Rio Grande Valley , the cries of the urracas — blackbirds — perched on the tops of palm trees swell to a noisy , unavoidable cacophony . That is also the strategy , it could be said , that local officials , health care providers and frustrated valley residents are trying to use to persuade Gov . Rick Perry and state Republican lawmakers to set aside their opposition and expand Medicaid , a key provision of the federal health law .
The Rio Grande Valley has a load of troubles : high unemployment , low-paying jobs , warring Mexican cartels , a meager tax base and legions of people without health insurance . While many of those woes seem incurable , expanding Medicaid to the region 's uninsured is , to Paula Gomez , who runs several local health clinics , a no-brainer .
`` I think if we 're not ready , if Texas does n't buy in in the next three months , shame on us , '' she says .
Texas has the highest rate of uninsured residents in the nation — 1 in 4 Texans has no health coverage — and the rate in the Rio Grande Valley is even higher . Medicaid is closed to anyone earning more than $ 196 a month , leaving many working adults ineligible and without coverage .
Under the health law , the federal government would pay the entire cost of the expansion for the first three years , then 90 percent in subsequent years . As it stands , Texas would have to spend about $ 1 billion a year over the next three years , say Democrats , to receive $ 27 billion in federal matching funds .
But Gov . Perry says Texas can ill afford to expand Medicaid , and he does n't trust that the federal government will pay its promised share . At a news conference last month , he blasted Obamacare 's Medicaid provisions :
`` Seems to me an appropriate April Fool 's Day event , makes it perfect to discuss something as foolish as Medicaid expansion , and to remind everyone that Texas will not be held hostage by the Obama administration 's attempt to force us into the fool 's errand of adding more than a million Texans to a broken system . ''
For now , uninsured patients in the Rio Grande Valley pay what they can for basic medical care , but specialty care — to follow up on a lump in the breast , for example — is almost always out of reach without some type of insurance , including Medicaid , according to Dr. Henry Imperial , the Brownsville Community Health Center 's medical director . `` Once you diagnose a cancer , then what ? How are you going to give me chemotherapy or surgery or radiation therapy ? '' he asks .
Hospitals in Texas end up with millions in unpaid bills , and the counties , by state law , have to provide basic medical care to destitute residents . That has led a number of counties in the Rio Grande Valley — and elsewhere — to pass resolutions supporting the Medicaid expansion .
For local Republicans , that mild act of defiance against a powerful governor — who is opposed to every provision in the federal health law — can seem like political suicide . It 's not something they 're eager to draw attention to .
`` It 's contrary to what the [ GOP ] leadership in Austin is recommending , but we thought it was important enough to take a position , '' says Republican Carlos Cascos , the county 's top elected official .
State Rep. Eddie Lucio III , a Democrat from Brownsville , faces daunting odds in trying to persuade the conservative Republicans who control the Legislature to buck Perry and approve a bill to expand Medicaid in Texas .
Lucio says he 's not sure what effect , if any , the resolutions by county officials , including Republicans like Cascos , are having . There is ample pessimism here in Brownsville that lawmakers 350 miles away in Austin will ever understand life in the Valley .
But because there is no hard deadline for when Texas or any other state has to sign up for the Medicaid expansion , health clinic director Paula Gomez is pressing on . She says she still remembers fighting the state to get drinkable water in the Rio Grande Valley , and she 'll patiently fight this war too .