President Donald Trump wants voters to believe that Republicans are the party protecting Americans with preexisting conditions . But in bills , lawsuits , and regulations , they ’ ve worked to do the very opposite .
Trump ’ s own administration imposed new rules just last week that would make it easier for insurance providers to discriminate against sick consumers .
On the same day news broke about the change , Trump didn ’ t even blink as he told an audience he held the exact opposite view . “ We will always protect Americans with preexisting conditions , ” he said at an event in Philadelphia earlier this month .
Republican candidates have followed Trump ’ s lead . Missouri Senate candidate Josh Hawley is telling voters that he supports “ forcing insurance companies to cover all preexisting conditions . ”
But here ’ s the thing : It isn ’ t true . Republicans are lying about their position on preexisting conditions , and voters have a right to know that .
Coverage for preexisting conditions matters to Americans . The Kaiser Family Foundation has found that it is the most important health care issue in this election . For 14 percent of Americans , it is the “ single most important ” factor in their vote .
We know Republicans do not support forcing insurance providers to cover patients with preexisting conditions because they spent most of 2017 trying to roll back that part of Obamacare .
We know Trump definitely does not want to uphold regulations on preexisting conditions because his administration has asked a federal court in Texas to throw those protections out .
Republicans aren ’ t telling the truth about their position because their actual position , it turns out , isn ’ t very popular . Americans like the idea of making sure sick people have access to health insurance .
With just over a week left until the midterm elections , Americans deserve to know the truth : Republicans support policies that would make it harder to for sick people to get health insurance .
There are some policy debates where it ’ s difficult to figure out where different candidates stand . For example , I don ’ t know what every candidate really means when they say they support “ Medicare-for-All. ” The term is shorthand for a universal coverage system , but what that system looks like exactly can vary .
The debate over preexisting conditions isn ’ t like that . It is a debate where we have lots and lots of evidence of where Trump and others stand .
Trump has repeatedly supported legislation , regulations , and lawsuits to make it harder for sick people to get health insurance .
Most obviously , he backed Republican efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act , replacing it with the American Health Care Act . That bill would have reopened the door for insurers to charge sick people higher premiums — and to stop covering the health law ’ s essential health benefits , a requirement in Obamacare that made sure more insurance plans covered more of the basics .
Less publicly , the Trump administration has pushed forward regulations that will drive up premiums for sicker Americans . He has widened the availability of skimpy “ short-term ” plans that are allowed to not cover prescription drugs , maternity benefits , or people with preexisting conditions .
But perhaps Trump ’ s most brazen move is supporting a lawsuit that would eliminate Obamacare ’ s preexisting condition protections completely . The Trump administration has filed a brief in federal court arguing that these protections are unconstitutional and ought to be thrown out completely .
Let that sink in for just a moment . President Trump is tweeting things like , “ All Republicans support people with preexisting conditions. ” But that is just not the position of his White House , full stop . If the federal court sides with the Trump administration , protections for Americans with preexisting conditions would cease to exist .
The world that President Trump has pushed for — in federal regulations , in congressional legislation , in legal filings — is undeniably a world where it is harder for the Americans who need health insurance to get access to it .
The landscape , unfortunately , looks similar when you look at the claims of Republican congressional candidates .
Take , for example , Hawley , the Missouri Senate candidate . He has run an ad with the following script :
We ’ ve got two perfect little boys . Just ask their mama . Earlier this year , we learned our oldest has a rare chronic disease . Preexisting condition . We know what that ’ s like . I ’ m Josh Hawley . I support forcing insurance companies to cover all preexisting conditions . And Claire McCaskill knows it . You deserve a senator who ’ s driven to fix this mess , not one who ’ s just trying to hang onto her office . And that ’ s why I approved this message .
Here ’ s the thing Hawley ’ s ad doesn ’ t say : He is also party to the lawsuit aiming to overturn Obamacare ’ s preexisting condition protections . He is among 20 conservative attorneys general who brought that case to a federal court in Texas , the one the Trump administration has signed onto .
Hawley and the 19 other attorneys general could drop off that lawsuit at any moment . They could decide the threat to preexisting conditions is just too great . But nothing like that has happened . Instead , as Sam Stein at the Daily Beast notes , “ no Republican candidates have explicitly dropped their support for that same lawsuit or disavowed it either . ”
We have seen one effort on Capitol Hill to do damage control around this lawsuit . Ten Republican senators introduced a bill that would require insurers to cover Americans with preexisting conditions .
This sounds great — until you learn about one gigantic loophole : The insurance policy wouldn ’ t have to cover the preexisting condition itself . In other words : An insurer would have to offer a health insurance plan to a cancer patient , but that health plan could exclude her cancer treatment . This , as the end of the day , isn ’ t much protection for preexisting conditions at all .
I saw this firsthand two years ago , when I went to Kentucky to write a story about Obamacare enrollees who voted for Trump . I asked a lot of voters : Why did you support the candidate who campaigned on getting rid of your health insurance ?
I heard the same answer again and again : He promised that something better would come along . The voters I met during that reporting trip had paid attention to the election . They knew that Trump wanted to repeal Obamacare . But they also listened to the promises that came after that — his repeated claims that he would come up with something better to replace it .
Americans are listening to the claims candidates make about health care . They are hearing Republicans claim that they want to protect preexisting conditions . And in some cases , they are probably believing those claims . Mostly because we don ’ t expect our representatives to lie so brazenly to us .
But everything I ’ ve seen covering the Obamacare repeal debate — from the bills on Capitol Hill to this new anti-ACA lawsuit — tells me that Republicans are not interested in protecting preexisting conditions . And voters should know that before casting their ballots .
Are you interested in more discussions around health care policy ? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates .