Old And Overmedicated : The Real Drug Problem In Nursing Homes
It 's one of the worst fears we have for our parents or for ourselves : that we , or they , will end up in a nursing home , drugged into a stupor . And that fear is not entirely unreasonable . Almost 300,000 nursing home residents are currently receiving antipsychotic drugs , usually to suppress the anxiety or aggression that can go with Alzheimer 's disease and other dementia .
Antipsychotics , however , are approved mainly to treat serious mental illnesses like schizophrenia and bipolar disorder . When it comes to dementia patients , the drugs have a black box warning , saying that they can increase the risk for heart failure , infections and death .
None of this was on Marie Sherman 's mind when her family decided that her mother , 73-year-old Beatrice DeLeon , would be better off in a nursing facility near her home in Sonora , Calif . It was n't because of her Alzheimer 's disease , explains Sherman — it was because her mother had had some falls .
`` We did n't want my dad to try to lift her , and we wanted to make sure she was safe , '' says Sherman .
It was n't long before the nursing home staff told Manuel DeLeon , Beatrice 's husband , that his wife was agitated and they wanted to give her some medication for that . So he said OK .
`` They kept saying she was making too much noise , and that they give her this medicine to quiet her down , '' he says .
Federal law prohibits the use of antipsychotics and other psychoactive drugs for the convenience of staff . It 's called a `` chemical restraint . '' There has to be a documented medical need for the drugs . `` But they just kept giving her more and more , '' says DeLeon , `` and I noticed when I used to go see her , she 'd just kind of mumble , like she was lost . ''
The DeLeon 's daughter , Marie Sherman , says that when her mother was n't `` lost '' she was `` out of her skin . ''
`` I mean , she was calling for help , '' Sherman says . `` She was praying , 'Our Father , who art in heaven , please , please help me . Please , take me , please , get me out ! ' ``
It turned out Beatrice DeLeon was given Risperdal and Seroquel , which are approved to treat bipolar disorder and schizophrenia . But professor Bradley Williams , who teaches pharmacy and gerontology at the University of Southern California , says antipsychotics should only be used as a last resort , and just for a month or so , before gradually being eliminated .
Check NPR 's interactive database below to see the history of antipsychotic drug usage at nursing homes in your area and how they compare to national and state averages .
Antipsychotic drugs change behaviors , Williams says . `` They blunt behaviors . They can cause sedation . It increases their risk for falls . '' And in the vast majority of cases , the drugs are n't necessary . `` If you want to get to the very basic bottom line , '' he says , `` why should someone pay for something that 's not needed ? ''
But residents or their guardians may not know that the drug is not needed . And they 're rarely told about the serious risks , says attorney Jody Moore , who specializes in elder law . She has sued nursing homes in California for failing to get informed consent when they use antipsychotic drugs , as required by law .
`` We learned that the families really were n't told anything other than , 'The doctor has ordered this medication for you ; please come sign a form , ' `` says Moore . `` And families did . ''
One of her clients is Kathi Levine , whose mother , Patricia Thomas , had Alzheimer 's . Despite her dementia , Thomas had been doing fine in 2010 : living in a memory care facility near Santa Barbara , walking and talking , dressing and feeding herself . Levine remembers visiting her mother at the facility one day when there was a party going on , with a Hawaiian theme .
I know the medications they gave her were n't my fault . But the guilt 's still there . It 's always going to be there .
`` My mom was standing up with a lot of the other ladies , doing the hula , '' recalls Levine . `` And she pulled me up off the chair and said , 'Hula with me . It 's fun . ' And I think that was the last time I remember her having that ' I love my life ' kind of look on her face . ''
Not long after that , Patricia Thomas fell and fractured her pelvis . After a brief hospital stay , she went to a nursing home for rehab .
`` But within a week , '' says Levine , `` she was in a wheelchair , slumped over , sucking on her hand , mumbling to herself , completely out of it , not even aware that I was there . ''
Her mother was so `` out of it , '' she could n't do the rehabilitation work that was the reason she went to the nursing home in the first place . So they discharged her . That 's when Levine first saw a list of her mother 's medications .
`` I literally freaked out , '' says Levine . `` I could n't believe all of these drugs on a list for my mother . ''
Among them were Risperdal and Haldol , both powerful antipsychotics . Levine tried to slowly wean her mother from the drugs , but Patricia Thomas remained in her wheelchair . She never had another conversation . She was dead in two months .
`` When you are your parent 's caretaker and their guardian , and things like this happen , you feel terribly guilty , '' says Levine . `` I know the medications they gave her were n't my fault . But the guilt 's still there . It 's always going to be there . ''
So Levine and her attorney , Jody Moore , brought a class-action lawsuit — the first of its kind — against the nursing home , charging wholesale violation of informed consent . Moore is a seasoned attorney but says she was amazed at a deposition she took from one of the doctors , who said `` not only do I not get informed consent , but I do n't know of any doctor who does , and you 're crazy to think that that 's my job . ''
The nursing home settled . It 's now required to change its practices . An independent monitor will make sure it follows through .
But this facility was not out of the ordinary when it came to dispensing unnecessary antipsychotic drugs . In 2011 , a government study found that 88 percent of Medicare claims for antipsychotics prescribed in nursing homes were for treating symptoms of dementia , even though the drugs are n't approved for that . So the next year , the federal government started a campaign to get nursing homes to reduce their use of antipsychotics by 15 percent .
That 15 percent reduction was supposed to take less than a year . It took almost two . And it still left almost 300,000 nursing home residents on risky antipsychotic drugs . But Beatrice DeLeon is no longer one of them .
She 's home again with her husband . The family found a state program that sends health aides to the house . And now she can have the kinds of conversations that mean something to her and to her family .
Beatrice DeLeon says `` thank you . '' She says that a lot . Currently , she 's not taking anything but her Alzheimer 's medication . But that seems to be enough , for a life filled with love and gratitude .