President Donald Trump named former Eli Lilly & Co. executive Alex Azar to lead the Department of Health and Human Services after agency ’ s past chief resigned amid blowback over his taxpayer-funded private jet travel .
“ Happy to announce , I am nominating Alex Azar to be the next HHS Secretary . He will be a star for better healthcare and lower drug prices ! ” Trump tweeted Monday .
If confirmed , Azar will take over the administration ’ s management of the Affordable Care Act . Trump and Congressional Republicans have called to repeal the health law , and the administration has taken steps to destabilize it , such as cutting funding for some programs and refusing to pay subsidies to health insurers . He ’ ll also be a key figure on drug costs .
Trump has been highly critical of the drug industry , saying that pharmaceutical companies are “ getting away with murder ” and threatening to use the federal government ’ s buying power to bring down prices .
However he ’ s taken no concrete action yet to do much on prices , and the former drug executive ’ s appointment may continue the trend of strong talk but little action , said Spencer Perlman , director of health-care research at Veda Partners , a policy analysis firm .
“ It is very unlikely the administration will take aggressive regulatory actions to control prescription drug prices , ” Perlman said in a note to clients Monday . “ The administration ’ s tepid response to drug pricing has not matched the president ’ s heated rhetoric . ”
Dan Mendelson , president of Avalere Health , a consulting firm , also didn ’ t think Azar represented a change in direction on pharmaceutical policy . “ His appointment will not change the president ’ s rhetoric , ” Mendelson said in a phone interview .
Before his time at Lilly , Azar served as deputy secretary at HHS under President George W. Bush . One former Obama administration official said that experience could help him at the agency .
“ While we certainly differ in a number of important policy areas , I have reason to hope he would make a good HHS secretary , ” said Andy Slavitt , who ran the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services under the last administration and who has been a frequent critic of efforts to derail Obamacare . Slavitt said he hoped Azar would “ avoid repeating this mistakes of his predecessor over-politicizing Americans ’ access to health care . ”
Azar , who ran Indianapolis-based Lilly ’ s U.S. operations until earlier this year , has been an advocate for more state flexibility under Obamacare . That matches up with what Republicans have pushed for , such as in a seemingly stalled bipartisan bill to fund insurer subsidies that help lower-income people with health costs .
As secretary , Azar would have broad authority over the program .
“ I ’ m not one to say many good things about Obamacare , but one of the nice things in it is it does give a tremendous amount authority to the secretary , ” Azar said during an interview with ███ TV in June . “ There are still changes that can be made to make it work a little better than it has been . ”
There are signs that the law is gaining popular support despite the repeal efforts . In recent state elections in Virginia , Democrats won a competitive governors race that saw health care emerge as a top issue . In Maine , residents voted to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act . Early enrollment in Obamacare plans earlier this month was also up considerably compared to last year .
Trump ’ s first HHS secretary , Tom Price , resigned in September after his extensive use of private and military jets at taxpayer expense was revealed . Azar must be approved by the Senate .
Senator Orrin Hatch , who heads the Senate Finance Committee that will review Azar ’ s nomination , called on Trump ’ s pick to help “ right the wrongs of this deeply flawed law . ”
“ For too long , hardworking , middle-class families have been forced to bear the brunt of Obamacare ’ s failures in the form of higher premiums and fewer choices , ” Hatch said in a statement .
Ron Wyden , the senior Democrat on the panel , said he would closely scrutinize Azar ’ s record .
“ At every turn , the president has broken his promises to American families to lower health care costs , expand access , and bring down the high price of prescription drugs , ” Wyden said in a statement .
Azar left Lilly in January , several months after another senior executive was named to succeed then-CEO John Lechleiter . A lawyer by training , Azar previously clerked for Antonin Scalia on the Supreme Court .