Shortly after the end of his inaugural parade , President Donald Trump issued his first executive order : instructions for the federal government to dismantle the Affordable Care Act “ to the maximum extent permitted by law . ”
The executive order is a powerful political statement about the health care law , one that directs agencies to “ waive , defer , grant exemptions from , or delay ” any taxes or penalties they possibly can . The order doesn ’ t give Trump any new powers , but does suggest that he wants to move quickly on dismantling major parts of the health overhaul .
“ This order does n't in and of itself do anything tangible , ” says Larry Levitt , vice president at the Kaiser Family Foundation . “ But it directs federal agencies to start taking steps to use their administrative authority to unwind the ACA in all sorts of ways . This is a signal that the Trump administration is not waiting for Congress to start making big changes . ”
It ’ s the clearest statement so far of Trump ’ s specific priorities on the health care law . In recent weeks , Trump has said he wants to improve health coverage for all Americans , but he ’ s been vague about what that means . This document suggests he may take aim at a piece of the law long loathed by Republicans : the individual mandate .
In particular , the executive order directs agencies to use any authorities within the bounds of the law to dismantle “ any provision ... that would impose a fiscal burden on any State , or a cost , fee , tax , penalty , or regulatory burden on an individual . ”
The mandate requires all Americans to have health care coverage , and it is critical to making the law work as a whole . It ’ s arguable that Trump could stop enforcing the individual mandate without an act of Congress — just as Barack Obama did in 2014 with the law ’ s employer mandate .
But this executive action on its own does not unravel the mandate , or any other part of Obamacare for that matter . Instead , it sets up a long , drawn-out process to change the law ’ s rules — an unwinding process that takes time . And there are still major limits to how much Trump can do before Congress acts .
“ Trump is going to have to comply with law , and that doesn ’ t allow him to repeal the Affordable Care Act unilaterally , ” health law expert Tim Jost , a law professor at Washington and Lee College , says .
From this perspective , as much as it ’ s a political scream , it ’ s perhaps more of a practical whisper ( at least for now ) .
Jost walked me through two especially important things to notice about the Trump executive order :
1 ) Most of the paragraphs in the executive order start with seven important words : “ to the maximum extent permitted by law ”
These words recognize that the only actions federal agencies can take are those that don ’ t conflict with the Affordable Care Act . Trump can take steps to revise the rules and regulations that the Obama administration wrote to explain how the law ought to work .
For example , this executive order says that agencies should try to “ waive ” any costs or regulatory burdens on “ makers of medical devices , products , or medications. ” At first glance , this would seem like an order to repeal the health care law ’ s medical devices tax .
But Trump can ’ t do that through executive order — the medical device tax is written into the law that Congress passed . He might be able to tweak the tax . He might be able to delay collection of the fine , for example , as the Obama administration did with the employer mandate . But he can ’ t kill it outright without Congress .
“ What he is saying here is that our general policy is going to be to deregulate , ” Jost says . “ He ’ s saying , ‘ I do not want more regulations ; we should grant waivers where we can , and give more authority to the states . ’ ”
2 ) Trump notes he ’ ll follow the Administrative Procedure Act for new rules . That ’ s important .
Section 5 of Trump ’ s executive order looks a bit dull , but it jumped out at Jost immediately . Here ’ s what it says :
To the extent that carrying out the directives in this order would require revision of regulations issued through notice-and-comment rulemaking , the heads of agencies shall comply with the Administrative Procedure Act .
What this means is that Trump can ’ t just start putting out new rules and regulations tonight . Instead , he ’ ll have to follow the Administrative Procedure Act , a law from 1946 that governs the somewhat laborious process of putting rules into place . This typically involves issuing draft rules , accepting comments , sometimes holding public hearings , and ultimately issuing a final rule that takes all the feedback into effect .
In other words : Rulemaking under the Administrative Procedure Act takes time . And a lot of important Obamacare regulations that govern how the law works are those that went through notice-and-comment rulemaking the first time around . This includes , for example , the rules that govern the individual mandate . It took more than a year to move from the first draft of the individual mandate regulation to the final version .
The Trump administration has full authority to write new rules around the individual mandate — to give those without coverage more exemptions , for example — but before those rules go into effect , they ’ ll need to go through a similar process .
Jost is generally a supporter of the Affordable Care Act . And based on these two reasons he outlined for me , this new executive order didn ’ t cause him much panic .
“ I was worried [ Trump ] would do something unpredictable , but this is what I expected , ” he says . “ I think he ’ s been advised that he can ’ t repeal the Affordable Care Act through executive action , and now we see where this goes . ”