Longtime Democratic Rep. Henry Waxman announced Thursday he will not seek reelection in the fall , becoming the latest architect of the Affordable Care Act to announce his retirement .
`` After 40 years in Congress , it 's time for someone else to have the chance to make his or her mark , '' the California congressman said in a statement .
Waxman will have served 20 terms in Congress by the time of his retirement . As prior chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee , he was instrumental in the drafting of ObamaCare in 2009 .
Two other Democrats involved in that process -- Rep. George Miller , D-Calif. , and Sen. Max Baucus , D-Mont . -- have also announced their retirement from Congress ( though Baucus is awaiting confirmation to be the next ambassador to China ) .
Republicans swiftly characterized Waxman 's decision as a sign of Democratic vulnerability .
Rep. Greg Walden , R-Ore. , chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee , said `` it 's a clear indication that House Democrats think they wo n't be wielding the gavel '' after the midterm elections in the fall .
`` With the way ObamaCare is playing out they have a tough battle to hold ... onto what they 've got , '' he said .
In a lengthy statement announcing his decision , Waxman said he takes pride in his legislative accomplishments , listing among them the Affordable Care Act . He called its passage the fulfillment of `` one of my lifelong dreams . ''
President Obama , in his State of the Union address , defended the health law against ongoing efforts by Republicans to undermine it . Technical problems with the launch of insurance exchanges last year raised questions about the law 's viability , but his administration has tried to address those issues and says enrollment is improving . Still , the rocky launch could cause problems for incumbent Democrats who voted for it .
Waxman leaves Congress after a career spanning four decades . He also co-authored a controversial cap-and-trade bill which would have effectively charged businesses for greenhouse gas emissions . In 2012 , he ran into controversy after he accused Republicans of acting `` like terrorists '' by trying to force the administration to approve the Keystone oil pipeline .
`` When I was first elected to the House - in 1974 - I hoped to be able to serve 20 years and leave a mark on some important issues , '' he said . `` I never imagined I would be in the House for 40 years and be able to advance every issue I care deeply about . But in what feels like a blink of an eye , it has been 40 years and I 've devoted most of my life to the House of Representatives . ''