( We last added to this post at 4:10 p.m . ET . )
`` You deserve better . ... I apologize . ... I 'm accountable to you . ''
That 's what Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius told Americans on Wednesday morning during a Congressional hearing into problems with the Obama administration 's HealthCare.gov website and Republicans ' concerns about the Affordable Care Act .
Rep. Marsha Blackburn , R-Tenn. , and Secretary Sebelius on who 's responsible for 'this debacle ' Listen
But while conceding `` the initial consumer experience at HealthCare.gov has not been adequate '' and that she should be held accountable for `` the debacle , '' Sebelius also made the case that `` the Affordable Care Act delivered on its product : quality , affordable health insurance . ''
Sebelius made the comments while summarizing the prepared statement she submitted to the House Energy & Commerce Committee at the start of a much-anticipated hearing at which she faced tough questions from Republicans .
She came under fire for a program that Republicans say restricts Americans ' health care choices , and for a website that has been problematic , at best , since it launched Oct. 1 . Even as Sebelius spoke , and repeatedly said that the site had never `` crashed '' but had at various times been barely moving , for many users a visit to HealthCare.gov on Wednesday brought only a message that `` the system is down at the moment . ''
The hearing began just after 9 a.m . ET . We updated several times as you 'll see below . For much more about the health care act and its launch , see NPR 's Shots blog .
Speaking in Boston on Wednesday , President Obama defended the Affordable Care Act , saying the federal law was modeled on the successful program enacted under former Gov . Mitt Romney in Massachusetts .
The `` parade of horribles '' predicted for what 's been dubbed `` Romneycare '' never materialized , he said .
`` Healthcare reform in this state was a success , '' he said . `` But , there were problems at the start . There were changes that needed to be made . ''
Enrollment was slow , but it picked up and now the `` vast majority '' of Massachusetts citizens are happy with their coverage , he said to applause .
The president acknowledged problems with HealthCare.gov , the Internet portal to access health plans under the ACA .
`` The website has n't worked the way it 's supposed to in these last few weeks , '' Obama said . `` There 's no denying it . The website is too slow ... and I 'm not happy about it . ''
`` I take full responsibility for making sure it gets fixed , '' he said .
Update at 11:45 a.m . ET . Fact-Checkers Take Aim At President 's Promise .
We 've added a related post : Obama 's 'Keep Your Health Care Plan ' Pledge Fails Fact Checks .
Update at 10:45 a.m . ET . `` Hold Me Accountable For The Debacle '' :
One of the more dramatic moments of the morning so far has been an exchange between Rep. Marsha Blackburn , R-Tenn. , and Sebelius .
Blackburn pushed Sebelius to name `` who 's repsonsible '' for the crashing and other problems with the HealthCare.gov website . After some back-and-forth , Sebelius answered that Michelle Snyder , chief operating officer at the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services , runs a key unit .
So , `` Michelle Snyder is the one responsible for this debacle ? '' Blackburn asked .
After a moment , Sebelius responded with some edge to her voice , saying :
`` Excuse me , congresswoman , Michelle Snyder is not responsible for the debacle . Hold me accountable for the debacle . I 'm responsible . ''
Update at 9:55 a.m . ET . Do n't `` Take Our Word For It '' :
Asked if she is confident the website will be running smoothly by Nov. 30 , Sebelius says she is . `` But I know it is n't fair to ask the American public to take our word for it , '' she acknowledges .
The big story in Washington today is the appearance of Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius before the House Energy & Commerce Committee .
As NPR 's Julie Rovner writes on the Shots blog , Sebelius follows Tuesday 's testimony from Marilyn Tavenner — administrator of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services .
Tavenner first apologized for the botched rollout of the HealthCare.gov website , and then spent several hours being peppered with questions from Ways and Means Committee Republicans . Many of the queries were about cancellation notices being received by people who buy their own insurance .
`` Many members of the committee , including [ Rep. Peter ] Roskam , R-Ill. , read letters from constituents who say they 'll have to pay more for new coverage . 'Can you understand the level of frustration and concern about what many Americans perceive to be a false claim from the administration ? ' he asked . `` Tavenner said it 's not that simple , and it 's not all bad . Many people who say they like their current plans do n't realize how little they cover. `` 'Sometimes they were in plans that they thought were fine until they actually needed hospitalization , ' she said . 'Then they found out it did n't cover hospitalization , or it did n't cover cancer . ' ``
There have been calls from some Republicans for Sebelius to step down or be fired because of the problems with HealthCare.gov .
The Shots blog will continue to follow the story closely . Wednesday 's hearing at which Sebelius will appear is set to begin at 9 a.m . ET . The committee plans to webcast the hearing it here . We 've embedded its player if you wish to watch here instead .
From the It 's All Politics Blog : 5 Questions Kathleen Sebelius Must Answer .