On March 30 , 2010 , President Obama signed the non-ironically named Affordable Care Act . That was 915 days ago .
From the moment the last of the 22 pens he used to sign the bill into law left the parchment , the federal government has been gearing up — and , of course , collecting cash — for Day One , non-ironically set 915 days in the future , Oct. 1 , 2013 .
In the meantime , though , the community organizer from Chicagoland exempted everyone in his administration from the new law ( as well as lawmakers and staffers in Congress ) . Lots of campaign donors and business buddies in blue states got waivers , too . But everyone else has to fall in line and get set for the federal government to gain an unfathomable degree of control over their lives .
Well , not everyone . Months ago , the government that could hardly administer a Cash for Clunkers program had to bail on the “ employer mandate , ” pushing the start date back to Oct. 1 , 2015 . That means businesses with more than 50 full-time employees are exempt from Obamacare .
But small businesses , the backbone of the American economy , are still forced to comply with the regressive law . The Wal-Marts and Best Buys and Olive Gardens escaped the government maw , but not the most vulnerable , entrepreneurial companies ( which don ’ t have million-dollar lobbyists eating stuffed shrimp with fat-cat lawmakers every night ) . Oh , and you have to enroll , too . No ifs , ands or buts .
So , your federal government has been in overdrive for 915 days , with millions of workers readying your new health care . How , you ask , is it going , with just days until kickoff ?
It ’ s a disaster . This week , the Obama administration announced that small businesses won ’ t be able to enroll online until November . They ’ ll still have to sign up , of course ; they just can ’ t do it online . The Health and Human Services Department offered this helpful guidance : Sign up by fax . Yes , fax — like it ’ s 1999 . Or , HHS said , just drop us a letter . Don ’ t worry , the broke and befuddled post office is sure to deliver your most private information to us .
The delay followed another change that dramatically affects small businesses . The administration announced that in 2014 businesses that use the exchanges will have only one available plan to cover employees — not a single alternative . So much for the president ’ s vow of choice and competition . What ’ s more , some “ exchanges ” won ’ t be able to calculate the costs of insurance plans or tax subsidies until at least November .
Then , with just days to go , the administration leaked out some truth . Stories emerged that Obamacare will bring high out-of-pocket costs , some running as high as $ 6,350 . The New York Times , last to vet the new program , suddenly reported that — shock ! — “ Lower Health Insurance Premiums to Come at Cost of Fewer Choices . ”
Still , the disastrous news didn ’ t stop the president from upselling his down-plunging program to confused Americans .
“ They ’ re going to be able to go to a computer , tap on the Web page and they ’ re going to be able to shop just like you shopped for an airline ticket or a flat-screen TV , and see what ’ s the best price for you , what ’ s the plan that ’ s best suited for you , and go ahead and sign up right there and then , ” he said .
• Joseph Curl covered the White House and politics for a decade for The ███ and is now editor of the Drudge Report . He can be reached at [ email protected ] and on Twitter @ josephcurl .