After an Illinois resident died from a vaping-related illness , Sen. Dick Durbin on Monday slammed the leadership of the Food and Drug Administration over a lack of oversight when it comes to the sales and marketing of e-cigarette and nicotine vaping products to minors .
“ Why are these highly addictive , dangerous products allowed to remain on the market ? Because the Food and Drug Administration remains , basically , undirected and misdirected when it comes to dealing with this threat , ” the Illinois Democrat said during a news conference at Lurie Children ’ s Hospital .
Durbin said he sent a letter last week to acting FDA Commissioner Norman Sharpless demanding “ immediate , decisive action ” as it relates to regulating the sale of vaping products .
“ FDA must immediately ban all e-cigarette flavors and devices that have not been approved for sale by the agency , ” Durbin said . “ Young , healthy people in Illinois and across the nation are getting sick and dying . The acting Food and Drug Administration commissioner has the power to do something . It ’ s time that he either does something or resigns . ”
An Illinois man died last month after contracting a lung disease related to the use of a vaping device .
Durbin said Illinois has seen 42 confirmed cases of “ vaping-related ” lung diseases . The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has said five people across the country have died as a result of lung diseases that were contracted as a result of e-cigarette use and vaping . The CDC is also examining another 450 possible cases of “ severe respiratory illnesses ” associated with e-cigarette and vaping use , Durbin said .
Dr. Maria Rahmandar , medical director of the substance use and prevention program at Lurie , said parents of teens should be direct with their children and discourage vaping use as much as possible .
“ I would encourage clear , consistent discussion of values around substance use in your house and discourage use , ” Rahmandar said . “ Love your teens , support them , but really send the message that no substance abuse should happen in my house . ”