President Trump announced that he will nominate Alex Azar as his Health and Human Services secretary , replacing Tom Price who was forced to resign in September amid a scandal over travel expenses .
“ Happy to announce , I am nominating Alex Azar to be the next HHS Secretary . He will be a star for better healthcare and lower drug prices ! ” the president tweeted Monday from the Philippines .
Trump has reportedly been leaning toward an Azar nomination , as he is a veteran of the agency .
Azar , served at HHS throughout the Bush administration , beginning in 2001 as general counsel , and concluding as deputy HHS secretary until 2007 . Until January , Azar worked as a senior executive at Eli Lilly . He also formed a health care strategic consulting firm called Seraphim Strategies .
According to a senior administration official , Azar is a twice unopposed , Senate-confirmed nominee—both for his role as general counsel and deputy secretary under President George W. Bush . The official told Fox News that Azar “ knows the agency ” and “ can hit the ground running . ”
The official told Fox News Azar has been a public leader in efforts to reduce drug prices—something Trump has been committed to accomplishing .
If confirmed , Azar would replace Trump ’ s first HHS secretary , Tom Price , who was forced to resign after criticism mounted over his private plane trips .
Price , a physician and former Republican congressman from Georgia , offered his resignation in late September , after reports revealed he flew on charters to visit community health centers in New Hampshire and Pennsylvania . Politico reported that he also took a government-funded jet in August to St. Simons Island , a Georgia resort where his family owns land . The outlet also reported that he took military aircraft for official trips to Africa , Europe and Asia , costing taxpayers more than $ 500,000 .
Senior department sources told Fox News that Price would repay $ 51,887.31 , though that repayment only represents a fraction of the total cost .