Pete Sessions said lawmakers are having 'quiet conversations ' about the threat . Obamacare ? We were just leaving …
Dozens of lawmakers and aides are so afraid that their health insurance premiums will skyrocket next year thanks to Obamacare that they are thinking about retiring early or just quitting .
The fear : Government-subsidized premiums will disappear at the end of the year under a provision in the health care law that nudges aides and lawmakers onto the government health care exchanges , which could make their benefits exorbitantly expensive .
Democratic and Republican leaders are taking the issue seriously , but first they need more specifics from the Office of Personnel Management on how the new rule should take effect — a decision that Capitol Hill sources expect by fall , at the latest . The administration has clammed up in advance of a ruling , sources on both sides of the aisle said .
If the issue isn ’ t resolved , and massive numbers of lawmakers and aides bolt , many on Capitol Hill fear it could lead to a brain drain just as Congress tackles a slew of weighty issues — like fights over the Tax Code and immigration reform .
The problem is far more acute in the House , where lawmakers and aides are generally younger and less wealthy . Sources said several aides have already given lawmakers notice that they ’ ll be leaving over concerns about Obamacare . Republican and Democratic lawmakers said the chatter about retiring now , to remain on the current health care plan , is constant .
Rep. John Larson , a Connecticut Democrat in leadership when the law passed , said he thinks the problem will be resolved .
“ If not , I think we should begin an immediate amicus brief to say , ‘ Listen this is simply not fair to these employees , ’ ” Larson told ███ . “ They are federal employees . ”
Republicans , never a fan of Democratic health care reform , are more vocal about the potential adverse effects of the provision .
“ It ’ s a reality , ” said Rep. Pete Sessions ( R-Texas ) . “ This is the law . … It ’ s going to hinder our ability with retention of members , it ’ s going to hinder our ability for members to take care of their families. ” He said his fellow lawmakers are having “ quiet conversations ” about the threat .
Alabama Rep. Jo Bonner said the threat is already real , especially for veteran lawmakers and staff . If they leave this year , they think they can continue to be covered under the current health care plan .
“ I ’ ve lost one staffer who told me in confidence that he had been here for a number of years and the thought of losing the opportunity to keep his health insurance on Dec. 31 [ forced him to leave ] . He could keep what he had and on Jan. 1 he would go into that big black hole , ” said Bonner , who had already planned his resignation from Congress . “ And then I ’ ve got another staff member that I think it will be a factor as she ’ s contemplating her future . ”
Lawmakers and aides on both sides of the aisle are acutely aware of the problems with the provision . Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) have discussed fixes to the provision . Boehner , according to House GOP sources , believes that Reid must take the lead on crafting a solution . Since Republicans opposed the bill , Boehner does not feel responsible to lead the effort to make changes .
The Affordable Care Act — signed into law in 2010 — contained a provision known as the Grassley Amendment , which said the government can only offer members of Congress and their staff plans that are “ created ” in the bill or “ offered through an exchange ” — unless the bill is amended .
Currently , aides and lawmakers receive their health care under the generous Federal Employee Health Benefits Program . The government subsidizes upward of 75 percent of the premiums for the health insurance plans . In 2014 , most Capitol Hill aides and lawmakers are expected to be put onto the exchanges , and there has been no guidance whether the government will subsidize those premiums . This is expected to cause a steep spike in health insurance costs .