Obamacare didn ’ t fail . It didn ’ t get repealed . It didn ’ t collapse . After one year of President Trump , Obamacare doesn ’ t really look all that different than it did under President Obama .
After a year of headlines about “ sabotage ” — some of which ran here at ███ — and a year in which Trump officials dramatically cut advertising for the law and pulled payments to insurers that risked driving them out of the market , the Affordable Care Act seems to be doing more or less fine .
Don ’ t be mistaken : The Trump administration didn ’ t help matters . Working overtime to repeal the law , telling the American people that the ACA is dead and gone , slashing advertising by 90 percent and enrollment support by 40 percent , ending key payments to insurers while Congress refused to appropriate them and take the issue off the table — the Republican Party and Trump did everything they could throughout 2017 to undermine Obamacare .
But we learned that the ACA is pretty resilient . The Trump administration released a report on Tuesday saying that 11.8 million Americans enrolled in health coverage for 2018 through the law ’ s insurance marketplaces , down just a tick from the 12.2 million sign-ups in 2017 .
Sure , Obamacare ’ s marketplaces are not exactly , on the whole , a robust and competitive market . For millions of people , insurance is still unaffordable . But for millions of others , the law is providing them with meaningful financial protections against medical bankruptcy .
“ At this point , the marketplaces are really functioning more broadly in their role as an extension of the public safety net than in their role as a competitive market , ” John Graves , a health policy professor at Vanderbilt University , told me .
But for the 10 million or so people who do receive financial help , they seem to be here to stay — and they ’ re still coming in : 27 percent of this year ’ s Obamacare customers were new , according to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services . The law ’ s structure protects them from premium hikes and gives insurers a guaranteed customer base that encourages plans to stay in the market , even if the patients are older and sicker than they would like .
This is reflected in the 2017 numbers : 11.8 million enrollees , 83 percent of whom received premium subsidies , which left them with an average monthly premium of $ 89 .
“ Overall , this report suggests a remarkably stable market , which is hardly the sense you ’ d get from the political debate , ” said Larry Levitt , senior vice president with the Kaiser Family Foundation .
In one remarkable way , a step that Trump took that appeared to undercut the ACA actually might have helped it .
The president decided last fall to end payments to health insurers known as cost-sharing reductions , which compensate them for reducing the out-of-pocket maximums of their lowest-income patients . It ’ s true that Trump was able to do so because House Republicans had been succeeding in their lawsuit to declare the payments unlawful without congressional approval .
But the White House should have known that the move would drive up the cost for federal taxpayers and could risk pushing insurers away from the market , leaving some people without any insurance options . Not to mention , Republicans in Congress have always had the option of simply approving the payments and rendering the issue moot . They just refuse to do so because they don ’ t want Obamacare to function as it ’ s supposed to .
What Trump might not have known , though , is how insurers and state insurance commissioners would respond . They found a clever workaround : Obamacare ’ s subsidies are based on the cost for one type of plan : a silver plan , which covers 70 percent of medical costs . Customers can also purchase bronze ( which cover 60 percent of costs ) or gold ( 80 percent ) or platinum ( 90 percent ) plans .
What insurers did , working with state officials , is jack up the rates for only silver plans to make up for losing the cost-sharing payments that Trump ended . That increased the size of the subsidies Obamacare customers received , which often made bronze plans free for people or made gold plans even cheaper than their less generous alternatives .
Nobody has covered this issue better than David Anderson at Duke University . Using the new CMS data , he created this nifty map , which shows that in some counties in states that aggressively deployed this strategy , more than half of customers purchased a gold plan for 2018 .
“ The numbers clearly show that the termination of CSR funding largely backfired if the intent was to undermine the marketplace , ” Levitt said . As previously noted , the boost to the premium subsidies led to customers paying less out of pocket every month than the year before .
As for the administration ’ s other actions to undermine the law , namely dramatic cuts to advertising and outreach , it ’ s more difficult to discern why they didn ’ t have a more negative effect . Trump officials defended those efforts as inefficient relative to their costs and touted this enrollment as the most cost-effective yet . But CMS also pulled out of relatively cost-free events with state-level activists .
In an ideal world , enrollment would keep going up and 12 percent of Americans are still uninsured — significantly lower than when the law was enacted , but far from universal coverage . But absent that , and despite these headwinds , the ACA markets are proving quite stable .
There is a working theory with some academic support , described to me by a state health care official last year , that at a certain point , a program becomes so ingrained in the public consciousness that it no longer requires robust outreach . We may be reaching that point with the ACA . Three-fourths of the marketplace ’ s customers were returning . They know the deal by now , and they want health insurance .
“ The demand for health insurance is pretty sticky , ” Katherine Hempstead , a senior adviser at the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation , told me . “ Most people don ’ t give it up lightly . ”
One group is left out in the cold under what Obamacare has become : People making more than 400 percent of the federal poverty level ( $ 81,000 for a family of three ) don ’ t receive any help from the federal government to buy their insurance . They bear the full brunt when insurers hike their premiums to account for Trump-inspired uncertainty or the GOP ’ s repeal of the individual mandate .
The two parties have two different answers for them : Democrats want to increase both the subsides that people receive and the eligibility limits so more people get them . Republicans , under regulations being proposed by the Trump administration , want to expand non-Obamacare insurance , which might be cheaper but doesn ’ t afford people the same financial protections if they have a medical emergency or a preexisting condition .
“ There is an untenable affordability gap between low- versus moderate-income people in the individual market , ” Hempstead said . “ The current policy proposals are designed to make it easier to have no insurance or inferior insurance , but many would consider that to be the wrong way to fix the problem . ”
We also haven ’ t yet seen the full impact of the administration ’ s proposal to expand association health plans or short-term insurance plans , neither of which have to abide by the ACA ’ s rules for preexisting conditions or the repeal of the individual mandate . The net effect is expected to be that fewer young and healthier people will buy insurance , which would in turn drive up costs even more . Young customers started to fall off in 2017 ; it could only get worse from here .
Nevertheless , 2017 provided a clearer picture of what Obamacare is likely to be : a relatively stable market for lower-income people to buy insurance with generous federal assistance . It is not a robust market where competition drives down prices . But it works , for what it is , and the law ’ s Medicaid expansion ( which covers upward of 15 million people ) and its protection for people with preexisting conditions will remain on the books as long as the Republican dream of repeal is dead .
There is little Trump can do to totally change that trajectory . He can work at the margins , and Trump officials have indicated , for example , that they might evaluate whether they should block the strategy used by insurers and states to boost the financial aid people received . They can approve Medicaid work requirements for the expansion population , which will likely cull people from the program . The regulations expanding non-Obamacare insurance will be finalized in the coming months . There will likely be an annual fall scramble to make sure there is at least one insurer in every county .
Paradoxically , Obamacare has become more popular than ever under Trump , yet many Americans believe the law will soon fail . The truth is Obamacare is mostly working as a social safety net to provide nearly 30 million people with health insurance .
It has not been the path to universal health coverage that its authors might have hoped — and it isn ’ t likely to work any better under a hostile White House . But it isn ’ t , whatever the president might say , imploding .