House Democrats promised in the 2018 campaign that they would beat back the Trump administration ’ s attacks on the Affordable Care Act , and they are ready to begin their counteroffensive . They are narrowly focused for now — and there ’ s good reason for that .
The influential Energy and Commerce Committee will hold a hearing Wednesday on four bills to undo recent actions by the administration that undermine the health care law . The bills are tightly targeted — reversing Trump-issued regulations and restoring funding for enrollment outreach cut by the Trump administration — but they still represent the first legislation to shore up the ACA to get a hearing in the new Democratic majority . They are starting with limited yet broadly popular ideas .
But looming in the background is the immediate existential threat to the health care law , a lawsuit brought by Republican states to overturn the entire statute . The new majority and their legal advisers have decided that , aside from a vote to join the law ’ s defense in the courts , they should not pass legislation designed to prevent the courts from throwing out the law in its entirety .
Given the success of prior legal challenges thought to be ridiculous that still found their way to the Supreme Court , some liberal legal scholars have argued House Democrats should use their new majority to pass a bill or bills to protect Obamacare from this latest vulnerability .
“ There ’ s no such thing as risk-free litigation , ” Nicholas Bagley , a University of Michigan law professor who has laid out possible actions the House could take , told me . “ You should do anything and everything you can to make this misbegotten lawsuit go away . ”
But other left-leaning lawyers and high-ranking Democrats see it differently . They believe there is no chance the Republican-led Senate would pass or President Donald Trump would sign such a bill . Moreover , they think Democrats would risk validating the case against the ACA if they tried to pass bills to fix it — by acknowledging that there is a problem to be fixed at all , when the House ’ s position in the lawsuit is that Obamacare is constitutional as it is .
“ Any proposed fixes will likely be partial , would open up the ACA to further amendment in the Senate , and would lend weight to plaintiff legislative history arguments , ” says Tim Jost , a health law professor at Washington and Lee University . “ This case is winnable in the courts and should stay there . ”
That is the prevailing belief among House Democrats right now , and that is why , though they are preparing to start moving bills to shore up Obamacare , they are leaving the most worrisome threat to the law out of their legislative agenda for now .
Democrats are taking up three bills to reverse the Trump administration ’ s sabotage
The Energy and Commerce Committee will hear testimony Wednesday on a few different bills to reverse the Trump administration ’ s attacks on Obamacare , usually the precursor to a bill getting a committee vote and then advancing to the House floor .
1 ) A bill to repeal the Trump administration ’ s expansion of short-term limited-duration plans
Short-term limited-duration health insurance is not required to comply with the ACA ’ s requirements around preexisting conditions or essential health benefits . People can be denied coverage based on their medical history , and these plans don ’ t have to cover basic services like prescription drugs .
And under the Trump administration ’ s regulations , so-called “ short term ” insurance — previously limited to lasting just three months — can be renewed for up to 36 months .
The Trump administration projected that 200,000 or so Obamacare customers will switch from marketplace plans to short-term coverage in the coming year . Other groups project even more desertion . Those people will probably be younger and healthier , drawn to the plans by their cheaper prices and because they don ’ t think they ’ ll need robust insurance . Actuaries expect that as a result , premiums for Obamacare plans will increase by as much as 10 percent on average , unless states move to regulate short-term plans more stringently .
The Democratic bill would repeal the short-term insurance regulations , blocking them from going into effect .
2 ) A bill to block the Trump administration ’ s recent decision to relax regulations for plans sold on the ACA ’ s insurance marketplaces
The Trump administration released new guidance last fall that would loosen some of Obamacare ’ s rules for waivers that states can seek to pursue their own health care ideas . One provision would allow customers to use the law ’ s generous tax subsidies to pay for those short-term insurance plans , heightening the risk that more people would abandon Obamacare for Trump-approved coverage . The requirement that any waiver would cover the same number of people would also be also softened , opening up the possibility that states could get approval for waivers that actually cover fewer people .
The Democratic bill would likewise block the Trump administration ’ s guidance from taking effect and prevent any similar changes from being implemented in the future .
3 ) A bill to increase funding for Obamacare enrollment and outreach efforts , which have been cut by the Trump administration
The Trump administration slashed federal funding for outreach and enrollment from $ 100 million to $ 10 million in its first year and kept outreach funding at that lower level in its second year . Obamacare enrollment fell off slightly in both those years , and research has shown that many uninsured people who are eligible for the ACA ’ s financial assistance don ’ t know that the law ’ s marketplaces exist or that tax credits are available to them so they can buy health coverage .
The Democratic bill would require the administration to perform enrollment and outreach activities and provide $ 100 million annually for those efforts .
A fourth bill under consideration would not reverse Trump ’ s actions , but it would instead force short-term plans to disclose they are not required to comply with Obamacare ’ s rules for preexisting conditions .
The debate over whether House Democrats should pass a bill to stymie the Texas lawsuit
Notably missing from the Democratic menu is any item to address the ongoing lawsuit , brought by Texas and 19 other Republican-led states , to overturn the Affordable Care Act entirely . Legal experts dismiss the states ’ argument as “ absurd , ” yet they worry it could find an audience among conservative jurists , given the prior success of anti-Obamacare lawsuits thought to be spurious that still found their way to the Supreme Court .
That argument has already won in a lower federal court , after all , though the decision is on hold pending appeal .
The foundation of the conservative state ’ s case is that because the Republican Congress repealed the individual mandate penalty in the 2017 tax law , removing the provision that Chief Justice John Roberts used to justify upholding the law ’ s constitutionality in 2012 , the entire law must now fall under Roberts ’ s theory . Legal scholars on the left and the right say it ’ s a ridiculous case ; Congress amends laws all the time , and the earlier Congress decided to repeal the mandate penalty while preserving the rest of the law . It ’ s legally vacuous to try to now apply Roberts ’ s old logic to a newly amended law .
Some left-leaning lawyers believe House Democrats should still pass a bill to neutralize the threat and either force Republicans to agree or use their inaction as a cudgel against them for failing to protect Americans from the lawsuit ’ s potential fallout . Bagley and his Michigan colleague Richard Primus laid out some options in the Atlantic in December : 1 ) increase the mandate penalty to a nominal amount ( even $ 1 ) ; 2 ) pass a bill declaring that the rest of Obamacare should stand even if the mandate falls ; or 3 ) simply repeal the mandate entirely , as it is still technically on the books even though the penalty for not complying is $ 0 .
If any of those options became law , they argued , it would leave the current lawsuit with no legal leg to stand on and remove the threat of conservative judges or the Supreme Court deciding to overturn the entire law , as one judge has already done . If Republicans refused to act , then House Democrats “ could hang this case like an albatross around the neck of the Republicans , ” Bagley says .
“ I ’ m tired of seeing Congress run for the courts . Protect your institutional interests , ” he told me . “ This is political hardball being played out in the courts right now . Judges who are ruling against the ACA — they ’ re not applying the law in a careful , thoughtful way . They are partisan actors in a partisan game . ”
But the argument hasn ’ t found purchase among House Democrats or their legal advisers . The House voted the day Democrats took over to join the legal defense of the law in the Texas case , but leadership seems content to leave it at that .
House Democrats believe there is no chance Senate Republicans or the White House would agree to such a plan without serious concessions — noting that the Justice Department has joined in part the lawsuit overturning the ACA — and that if they moved to fix the law , they would give the Republican states fodder to bolster their case that the law has a legal vulnerability .
“ We take very seriously the threat we could have a worst of all worlds : A legislative fix does not become law and only serves to undermine the position of the House , which is that the ACA is constitutional as is , ” one House aide told me .
Another source familiar with the situation elaborated : “ If there was a chance that a clean fix could be enacted , it would be worthwhile . ... But there is zero chance that a clean fix could be enacted , and the downside is it creates all of these other things . ”
The internal debate seems to be settled ; Democrats have chosen their path . That explains why , even as House Democrats are undertaking the work to protect the ACA , they have left the latest legal threat off their to-do list .