Beyond 'Bumper Sticker ' Slogans : 2020 Democrats Debate Details Of Medicare-For-All
Bernie Sanders is back , but one of his signature policies never left .
In 2015 , he introduced Medicare-for-all to many Democrats for the first time . Since Sanders ' first run for president , that type of single-payer health care system has become a mainstream Democratic proposal .
Last week , Sanders launched his second presidential campaign , amid a field of presidential candidates who are trying to figure out how to position themselves around the policy . Trying to stand out from the pack , though — especially on health care — poses a problem : Differentiating yourself means getting into the details , and getting into the details can turn voters off .
Over the last few weeks , candidates have been working to show voters the daylight between their respective health care proposals .
New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker has stressed that he supports Medicare-for-all , and that he wants private insurers to have a role in that system . `` Even countries that have vast access to publicly offered health care still have private health care , '' he told reporters this month .
Minnesota Sen. Amy Klobuchar says she wants a public option , in the form of letting people buy into Medicaid . As for single-payer health care , she says it 's a possibility in the long-term .
Ohio Sen. Sherrod Brown , who says he 's still debating a run , also wants a sort of public option , but only for people above age 50 , whom he would allow to buy in to Medicare . `` I think Medicare-for-all will take a while , and it 's difficult , '' he told CNN 's State of the Union .
Long story short : In a huge Democratic presidential field , health care is the first issue where candidates are really differentiating themselves .
`` Health reform is always more popular as a bumper sticker than as a piece of legislation , '' said Larry Levitt , senior vice president for health reform at the Kaiser Family Foundation .
He points to both the Obamacare and the Obamacare repeal efforts as examples — some ideas behind Obamacare , like insuring pre-existing conditions , were popular . But other aspects that proponents said were necessary to make it work , like the individual mandate , infuriated some voters , helping propel Republicans to big wins in 2010 .
Likewise , the Obamacare repeal effort fired up many Republican voters , but the implications of the various repeal plans — fewer people with insurance , lack of protections for pre-existing conditions — ultimately helped doom the effort .
Medicare-for-all may prove to be yet another example of this trend , according to Levitt .
`` There 's a huge political benefit for candidates to be in favor of the idea of Medicare-for-all in a primary , '' he said . `` But the more the details get filled in , the less popular that idea will be . ''
California Sen. Kamala Harris may be the first to face a big lesson in this . At a recent CNN town hall , host Jake Tapper asked her about her support of Sanders ' Medicare-for-all bill , which he said would `` totally eliminate private insurance . ''
( A quick note here : Sanders ' plan does not totally eliminate private insurance , but it would vastly diminish its role . )
Harris said that she would eliminate private insurance — but after a quick backlash , the next day clarified , with a campaign spokesman saying she also supports more incremental health care overhauls .
Polling also shows how tricky selling Medicare-for-all could be once the details come into play . A January poll from Kaiser shows that nearly 7 in 10 Americans like Medicare-for-all if they hear it will eliminate premiums and out-of-pocket costs . But that support drops to around 4 in 10 if people hear it will mean higher taxes .
Both of those things could be true of a Medicare-for-all system . But trying to sell even this basic trade-off on the campaign trail — especially this early — is tough .
At the other , more moderate end of the spectrum , Klobuchar said she 's for the broad goal of `` universal health care , '' and did get specific on her support of a public option . But when it comes to Medicare-for-all , she remained vague , saying it could be a possibility . Voters will almost certainly try to pin her down more on that in coming months , but for now her answer may help keep her from alienating some more liberal voters .
For many candidates , keeping health care rhetoric broad might be a smart move for now , says Nadeam Elshami , former chief of staff to House Speaker Nancy Pelosi .
`` It 's okay for a candidate to say , 'Look : This is generally what I believe in . But I 'm willing to hear first and then get into specifics later , after I have a deeper discussion of this issue , ' '' he said .
Progressive health care overhauls will also likely feed into one of President Trump 's main attack lines : labeling Democrats as `` socialists '' as a way of painting them as extreme .
`` It 's a surprising development that 10 years after the passage of the Affordable Care Act and after a massive political backlash against it , and a huge effort to defend it , Democrats are in there immediately swerving so hard to an even greater government role for health care , '' said Michael Steel , a Republican strategist who worked for former House Speaker John Boehner and Jeb Bush 's 2016 campaign .
Republicans know political backlash well — the backlash to their repeal efforts culminated in the GOP losing the House in 2018 . Whatever criticism Trump throws Democrats ' way on health care for 2020 , they will likely counter by asking him if he has his own alternative to Obamacare , having failed to fully repeal it .
Until then , Democrats will be doing similar calculations on both health care and a variety of other issues : weighing sweeping , progressive ideas that the president could try to label as `` socialist '' against incremental policies that might not excite liberal voters — and deciding which choice is most likely to get a Democrat into office .
A basic tension underlies Democratic plans to overhauls the health care system : Only 1 in 3 Americans rate health care in the U.S. as `` excellent '' or `` good , '' according to Gallup . But at the same time , a large majority — 7 in 10 — view their own personal health care as `` excellent '' or `` good . ''
Which is to say , it 's easy to see how voters might want the system massively reformed . In addition , incremental changes that do n't go as far as Medicare-for-all might particularly infuriate progressive voters .
But at the same time , voters will likely bristle if that reform threatens to change their own health coverage , as some major health care overhauls , like Medicare-for-all , might do .
`` There is a reason that President Obama 's signature promise on Obamacare was 'If you like your plan , you can keep it , ' '' Steel said .
That promise proved untrue — some Americans saw their health care plans canceled under the new Obamacare rules , and Politifact named Obama 's statement the `` lie of the year '' in 2013 .
Should a Democratic candidate 's health care proposal similarly threaten people 's current health plans , it 's a safe bet that it will become a major Republican line of attack .