Democrats are ready to go on the health care offensive . And Sen. Brian Schatz ( D-HI ) may have a new plan for them to do it .
In an interview with ███ , Schatz revealed that he ’ s preparing a new bill that could grant more Americans the opportunity to enroll in Medicaid by giving states the option to offer a `` buy-in '' to the government program on Obamacare 's exchanges .
His proposal would expand the public health insurance program from one that covers only low-income Americans to one open to anyone seeking coverage , depending on what each state does . The idea is similar to the government-run “ public option ” that some Democrats advocated for during the battle over the Affordable Care Act ’ s passage .
Schatz ’ s proposal comes in the wake of Republicans ’ failed efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act , where Medicaid proved an especially resilient benefit . Some Republican senators who signed on to bills that would greatly slash subsidies for private insurance drew the line at Medicaid cuts , arguing they would be too harmful to low-income Americans .
“ One of the unintended consequences of the Republicans trying to cut Medicaid is they made Medicaid really popular , ” Sen. Schatz said in an interview . “ This conversation has shifted . There was a time where Medicare was really popular and Medicaid was slightly less popular . What this ACA battle did was make both of them almost equally popular . ”
The proposal also comes amid an intraparty debate among Democrats about how to build on the health care law . The party rallied around the Affordable Care Act during Republican attacks , but coming out of that intense fight , different ideas have emerged about how to continue expanding health insurance coverage . Progressives have rallied around single-payer , embracing Bernie Sanders ’ s plan to virtually eradicate private health insurance and replace it with a single government insurer as a means of extending coverage to the 28 million Americans who currently still don ’ t have it .
Schatz said he would support Medicare-for-all , even as he puts forward a different proposal . “ If there ’ s ever a vote for single-payer , I ’ m a ‘ yes , ’ ” he told ███ . “ But there are lots of things we can do in the meantime to make progress for tens of millions of Americans . And we should do those things . ”
For years now , Democrats have kicked around the idea of letting Americans buy into the Medicare program , which covers those older than 65 .
Only more recently has the idea of allowing a similar buy-in to the Medicaid program gained traction . The Nevada legislature passed a bill this spring that would have allowed all state residents to enroll in the public program — the first such bill to move through a statehouse — but it was ultimately vetoed by Republican Gov . Brian Sandoval .
Schatz ’ s bill would give all states the option of opening up their Medicaid programs to uninsured Americans who wish to purchase coverage . It would be similar , functionally , to how states currently have the option under Obamacare to expand their program to all Americans making less than 133 percent of the federal poverty line ( about $ 15,000 for an individual ) .
It would preserve Medicaid as is for the low-income Americans who already are enrolled on the program . But it would let those who are currently too high-income to qualify pay a premium to join the program . Those who qualify for Affordable Care Act tax credits would be able to use the subsidies to buy into the Medicaid program , just as they do right now to buy private coverage on the marketplace . That would make Medicaid into the Affordable Care Act ’ s public option , creating another insurance plan in markets with few or no private plans and putting private payers in competition with the much cheaper Medicaid system .
It ’ s possible that this could hurt the private insurance market , reducing enrollment as more choose Medicaid , an outcome that wouldn ’ t upset Schatz .
“ I ’ m agnostic what that may do to the private insurance market , ” he says . “ I don ’ t have a strong ideological bent there . If the private insurance market can survive , in a context of a public option , good for them . But if they can ’ t , then that will tell you something about the nature of the market . ”
The Schatz bill would also raise Medicaid ’ s payment rates to doctors and hospitals to match those of the Medicare program . Currently , the Medicaid prices are 72 percent of those that Medicare pays — which in turn pays less than private insurers . Raising Medicaid prices to be equal would likely lure more doctors to participate in the program — but also make Medicaid ( and the premiums to buy into Medicaid ) significantly more expensive .
Schatz says he ’ s aware of the trade-off — that higher prices will drive up the cost of the buy-in — but believes it ’ s a worthwhile one to make , to ensure buy-in enrollees have access to a wide network of doctors .
“ You pay providers more ; that doesn ’ t come from thin air , ” Schatz says . “ My judgment is you ’ re going to get better uptake if you have a broader provider network , and the more participants , the better the risk pool and the better the score . ”
The Schatz bill envisions that Medicaid buy-in enrollees might have a slightly different benefit package than those who already qualify for the program . Medicaid programs often have specific benefits tailored to a low-income population , such as providing transportation to certain doctor appointments .
The buy-in population would get a plan that covers the Affordable Care Act ’ s 10 essential health benefits , which includes things like doctor visits , hospital visits , and prescription drugs .
The buy-in program would not be national , but rather would rely on states opting into the program . This could lead to a similar outcome as the Affordable Care Act ’ s Medicaid expansion — made optional by a 2011 Supreme Court decision — where some states , typically run by Democrats , have a significant expansion of coverage , and others , helmed by Republican governors , stick with the status quo .
“ I have reservations about that , ” Schatz says . “ It ’ s Medicaid — that is the way it ’ s configured , the reason it ’ s got broad bipartisan support — but you ’ re right if a governor or legislature chooses not to provide more coverage , they would be able to do that under this scenario . ”
The crucial context for Schatz ’ s bill is the ongoing debate over what kind of health care bill Democrats would want to implement if they took back congressional majorities in 2018 or 2020 .
With the Republican bill dead and buried ( at least for now ) , Democrats are entertaining health care solutions that would expand the government ’ s footprint well beyond Obamacare . About 60 percent of House Democrats have now co-sponsored Michigan Rep. John Conyers ’ s single-payer plan , which virtually overnight would cause the end of private health insurance and entail billions more in government spending and massive disruption to the insurance markets . Bernie Sanders is expected to release his single-payer proposal in early September .
Schatz ’ s new bill would face hurdles in achieving true universal coverage : States could decline to offer it , undocumented immigrants could still be left uninsured in many places , and some Americans might simply choose to go without insurance because the new Medicaid enrollees would likely have to pay premiums and deductibles .
Though they would entail massive tax increases , some single-payer proposals — like Conyers ’ s — are explicitly designed to cover every American under one program and eradicate patient cost sharing .
Similarly , the single-payer plans would outlaw the employer-sponsored plans that about 150 million Americans currently rely on for their insurance ; Schatz ’ s plan wouldn ’ t directly attack private insurers , and would thus be seen as more politically feasible , even if its coverage gains are less certain . Conyers and Sanders also would likely advance multibillion-dollar tax increases on the wealthy ; Schatz ’ s proposal wouldn ’ t entail a huge new tax hike on the rich to subsidize insurance for the poor .
But though Schatz and Sanders ’ s plans diverge sharply , they both emerge in a similar context — one in which Democrats are increasingly comfortable saying the government should guarantee insurance for everyone .
“ The bigger-picture conversation is no longer about , ‘ Should the federal government have a larger role in health care ? ’ but , ‘ What is the correct configuration of statutes and taxes and subsidies that will get the most coverage at the lowest price for the most Americans ? ” Schatz said .
He downplays the degree of disagreement within his own caucus . Not only is he likely to support Sanders ’ s bill , but he says that his team is currently working with “ about a dozen ” different senators on co-sponsoring his Medicaid proposal , including Sanders . He added that three prominent Democratic senators — Kirsten Gillibrand ( NY ) , Cory Booker ( NJ ) , and Tammy Baldwin ( WI ) — are also working with his office on the plan , even though they haven ’ t agreed to co-sponsor the ( still-unfinished ) legislation .
Even if Democrats don ’ t agree on their plan just yet , they ’ re using their time in the minority to begin field-testing different ideas about how to improve on Obamacare should the chance arise .
“ I ’ m glad a lot of people with competing ideas are likely to be co-sponsors of each others ’ plans , ” Schatz said .
He said he ’ s open to alternative approaches advanced by Democrats . “ There was a famous boxer who said , ‘ Everyone has a plan until they get punched in the mouth. ’ And I think , in this instance , everyone has the best idea until they have a hearing , ” he said . “ Of course , I like my idea the best . But in order for the process to work , we have to subject all our ideas to the public hearing process . ”
The immediate prospects for also finding consensus across the aisle are considerably grimmer , although Schatz said he did hope to talk to Sen. Lamar Alexander ( R-TN ) , the chair of the Senate Health , Education , Labor , and Pensions Committee , about his plan . But as long as Trumpcare remains dead , Democrats are eager to begin putting their own ideas forward .
“ As important as the ACA fight was , we weren ’ t making progress . We were protecting progress , ” Schatz said . “ Now it ’ s time to talk about how to make the system better for everybody . ”