Vice President Pence tried Saturday to deliver a pep-talk to Americans after fellow Republicans ’ failed effort to overhaul ObamaCare -- admitting that members are “ back to the drawing board ” but vowing that President Trump will “ keep fighting . ”
Pence spoke in the aftermath of House Speaker Paul Ryan on Friday cancelling the final vote for the ObamaCare replacement bill , upon concluding he didn ’ t have enough votes despite the chamber ’ s GOP majority .
Republicans Ryan and Trump after announcing the cancellation , sounded as if efforts to fulfill campaign promises to repeal and replace the 2010 health care law were essentially finished .
Ryan publicly said Americans would be living with ObamaCare for the “ foreseeable future , ” while Trump simply told The New York Times , “ It ’ s enough already . ”
However , Trump and Pence on Saturday seemed to come back fighting .
“ ObamaCare will explode , and we will all get together and piece together a great healthcare plan for THE PEOPLE , ” Trump tweeted . “ Do not worry ! ”
Pence later said at a business event in Charleston , West Virginia , that small-business owners in the state repeatedly tell him about the need to dismantle ObamaCare because it “ stifles growth ” and slows job creation .
“ President Trump is never going to stop fighting to keep his promises to the American people , ” he said
He also argued those who claimed victory in Republicans ’ failure Friday are merely championing the status quo and said , “ I promise you , that victory won ’ t last for long . ”
Pence also put pressure on West Virginia Sens . Shelley Moore Capito , a Republican , and Joe Manchin , a Democrat , to confirm Judge Neil Gorsuch as the next Supreme Court justice .
However , he also made clear that Gorsuch , Trump ’ s pick , would be confirmed “ one way or another , ” implying that Senate Republican leaders would invoke parliamentary tactics to win confirmation with a simple , 51-vote majority .
Pence was joined at the first event by Small Business Administration leader Linda McMahon , who helped start and run World Wrestling Entertainment .
“ Maybe we could have used a couple of WWE superstars on Capitol Hill yesterday , ” Pence , who did his share of arm-twisting for ObamaCare reform , said jokingly .
On Friday , after the vote was cancelled , Trump appeared to already be focusing on tax reform and returning to his plan to allow ObamaCare to continue -- with the expectation that the 2010 health care law would implode amid increasing costs and dwindling options for Americans .
Still , his tweet Saturday suggested a potential willingness to work on a bipartisan plan on overhauling the law -- albeit a scenario in which Democrats come to the GOP-controlled Congress to work together on improvements .
Late Friday , Tennessee GOP Sen. Bob Corker also suggested the fight to replace ObamaCare was not finished .
“ At some point , on behalf of the American people , we have to resolve the issues that are driving up costs , limiting choices , and causing the individual market to spiral downward , ” he said . “ I stand ready to work with the administration and my colleagues on both sides of the aisle in order to fix our broken health care system . ”