Mr. Trump and Republicans in Congress failed this year in their efforts to cut Medicaid and could try again in 2018 . Speaker Paul D. Ryan said this month that Republicans would try next year to slow the growth of federal health spending because “ it ’ s the health care entitlements that are the big drivers of our debt . ”
But Senator Mitch McConnell , the majority leader , has been leery of another run at health care in an election year , and it is possible that Medicaid could , in the near future , actually grow further under the Affordable Care Act . Maine voters approved a referendum last month to expand Medicaid in that state , though Maine ’ s Republican governor , Paul R. LePage , is dragging his feet . Mr. LePage will not be on the ballot in November , when the state could elect a governor more willing to accept the referendum ’ s results .
The governor-elect of Virginia , Ralph S. Northam , has vowed to expand Medicaid and could have an evenly split House of Delegates , depending on the outcome of a drawing of lots this week that will decide the winner of a tied race in southeastern Virginia .
A Democratic wave election in November could also shift the balance of power in a few other state capitals .
While the marketplaces , or exchanges , have struggled with a series of problems since they opened in 2014 , Medicaid , administered by an experienced corps of state officials , has gone from strength to strength . Public appreciation for the program has steadily increased as people come to understand its importance in the health care system , including its central role in combating the opioid epidemic .
And though Congress has effectively repealed the requirement for people to have health insurance , federal subsidies are still available to low- and moderate-income people who want insurance . The federal government pays , on average , about three-fourths of the premium for more than three-fourths of the people who buy insurance through the Affordable Care Act marketplace .