The Affordable Care Act faced another legal challenge Tuesday in federal court , as a group of business owners and individuals pushed back against an IRS regulation they say is both unlawful and potentially crippling .
The regulation , which stems from the ACA , defines which applicants are eligible for subsidies in connection with obtaining health care coverage . It 's a significant distinction , because those subsidies trigger massive employer and individual obligations in the states where they are awarded .
The plaintiffs in Halbig v. Sebelius say the plain text of the ACA , also known as ObamaCare , limits subsidies to applicants in states that have set up their own exchanges .
`` Congress figured because it was loading up the state exchanges with a lot of goodies that just about every state would make the choice to participate , ” said Sam Kazman , general counsel for the Competitive Enterprise Institute .
The administration was `` unpleasantly surprised '' when dozens of states `` said thanks , but no thanks , '' Kazman said . He believes the IRS is acting in concert with the administration to extend those attractive subsidies to all states – including those that opted out , an interpretation which gives rise to both employer and individual mandates and penalties – critical to helping fund the ACA .
The government , which lost its bid to have the case dismissed , argues that the plaintiffs are misreading the statute .
`` The plaintiffs ' reading of the act is wrong , '' the Department of Justice argued in its motion to dismiss filing . `` Congress made clear that an exchange established by the federal government stands in the shoes of the exchange that a state chooses not to establish . ''
U.S. District Judge Paul Friedman had plenty of tough questions for both sides Tuesday , including just how far – and where – he should go to look for more information about what Congress actually intended .
The plaintiffs say it 's simple : the text of the law . The government argues it would be nonsensical to read the provision literally and out of context with the overall intention of the law .
Friedman pledged to get the parties a quick ruling , but offered no timeline .