Here ’ s something to consider if you ’ re a disgruntled conservative angry about the Senate ’ s Obamacare replacement bill : Susan B. Anthony was a vehement opponent of the 15th Amendment . That ’ s the amendment which reads , “ The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of race , color , or previous condition of servitude. ” Why would this genuine icon of feminism ( not to be confused with hustlers like Hillary Clinton ) object to such a huge leap forward for democracy and justice ? She believed it didn ’ t go far enough .
What has this to do with Obamacare repeal ? Anthony ’ s argument against ratifying the 15th Amendment was identical to that which Senators Ted Cruz , Dean Heller , Ron Johnson , Mike Lee , and Rand Paul are using to justify their refusal to support the Better Care Reconciliation Act of 2017 ( BCRA ) , a draft of which can be found here . Anthony was outraged that the 15th Amendment failed to extend the franchise to women . She was morally right , but politically naïve . If that amendment had included the word “ sex , ” or “ gender ” as it would be formulated in our era , it would never have been ratified in 1870 .
For those who find the analogy between the 15th Amendment and Obamacare strained , consider that the former passed the House 144 to 44 and the Senate 39 to 13 , receiving zero Democrat support in either body . And ratification also encountered enormous resistance . In the end , the amendment was ratified by enough states , but not before being rejected by California , Delaware , Maryland , Kentucky , New Jersey , Oregon , and Tennessee . All of which means that , if Susan B. Anthony had prevailed in her quixotic quest to include women ’ s suffrage in the 15th Amendment , black men may have waited decades to get the vote .
Likewise , we will be forced to live with Obamacare — in its current dysfunctional form — for decades if headline hounds like “ Grandstand Rand ” Paul insist on sprinting from one broadcast studio to another braying about insurance for $ 1 a day and parroting Democrat talking points like the following : “ The insurance companies make all the money ; all of this is predicated upon still propping up the insurance companies. ” Senators Cruz , Heller , Johnson , and Lee are not as irresponsible as Paul , but they tend to resist the reality that politics is the art of the possible . Lee provides an example in his statement on BCRA :
[ T ] he Senate healthcare bill released yesterday does not repeal Obamacare . It doesn ’ t even significantly reform American healthcare… It bails out insurance companies . It props up Obamacare through the next election . It lays out plans to slow Medicaid spending beginning in 2025 , but that probably won ’ t happen . And it leaves in place the ham-fisted federal regulations that have driven up family health insurance premiums by 140 percent since Obamacare was implemented . As the bill is currently drafted , I won ’ t vote for it .
This nonsense suggests that Lee doesn ’ t get how reconciliation works . He has been in the Senate since 2011 , and should know about the Byrd Rule : “ The Byrd Rule generally treats as extraneous any provision of a reconciliation measure that doesn ’ t change the level of spending or revenues , or where the change in spending or revenues is ‘ merely incidental ’ to the provision ’ s non-budgetary effects. ” Thus , Lee ’ s kvetching about the failure to eliminate Obamacare ’ s regulations is naïve . Even less insightful is his claim that BCRA doesn ’ t significantly reform American healthcare . He clearly doesn ’ t get its Medicaid provisions .
Obamacare ’ s Medicaid expansion is a cruel fraud . It perverted the program — at the expense of poor children , the disabled , and the elderly — to cover able-bodied adults whose incomes exceed federal poverty guidelines . And this is no mere inconvenience . Townhall reports that in Illinois alone , “ 752 Illinoisans on the state ’ s Medicaid waiting list have died awaiting needed care since the General Assembly voted to accept the Obamacare expansion. ” Even if BCRA did nothing but repeal the “ reform ” law ’ s Medicaid expansion , and it does , its impact would qualify as far more than “ significant. ” Here ’ s Avik Roy on this very point :
The Senate bill includes and refines the best part of the House bill : its reforms of Medicaid.… First , the bill repeals Obamacare ’ s Medicaid expansion , and replaces it with tax credits so that low-income Americans can buy the coverage of their choice at an affordable price.… Second , the bill gives states a new set of tools to make their Medicaid programs.… Third , the bill puts the legacy Medicaid program on a long-term per-capita cap tied to medical inflation through 2025 , and conventional inflation ( CPI-U ) thereafter .
This third point has been misrepresented by the Democrats in Congress and the media as another “ mean ” Republican plot to hurt the poor . In fact , the concept of per-capita limits based on GDP , CPI , or some other objective guideline originated with the Clinton administration , but many of the “ reporters ” writing about BCRA were in diapers when Clinton was President . And has-beens like Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer have no interest in the facts . That reality is what should be the difference between Republicans and Democrats . The former are expected by their constituents to do the right thing to the extent that it is politically feasible .
Which brings us back to Susan B. Anthony and the 15th Amendment . Anthony was in the right and , in the end , her fellow Republicans overcame decades of Democrat obstruction and pushed through a constitutional amendment that removed the barriers to women ’ s suffrage . However , in 1869 , that wasn ’ t politically feasible . That ’ s where we are today with Obamacare . Conservatives know that Obamacare should be eradicated root and branch . But full repeal just isn ’ t politically possible in 2017 . So , it ’ s time to face reality and get rid of as much of this abomination as we can now . AHCA/BCRA isn ’ t perfect but it ’ s a damn good start .