The biggest Signal this week is , of course , the Senate trial of Donald Trump . But you , dear readers , can watch that for yourselves on any news channel . There ’ s also a lot of Noise surrounding the trial . A hot-and-bothered Trump tweeted over 130 times from Davos on Wednesday . Ad Policy
Let ’ s cut through the fog and get to the other Signals . First off , there ’ s the new coronavirus raging in parts of China , and the increasingly frenzied efforts to stop it from spreading globally—cities on lockdown , public gatherings in Beijing banned , health checks at airports around the world .
You ’ ve probably read about the outbreak . But you may not know how badly prepared the United States is to counter a pandemic , as a result of bipartisan neglect of our public health infrastructure . The highlights : In 2012 , the Obama administration reallocated billions of dollars away from the Prevention and Public Health Fund to make up for cuts to Medicare ’ s physician payments . In 2018 , Congress cut the PPHF by another $ 1 billion , and the Trump administration then diverted additional millions away from the National Institutes of Health and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . In response , the CDC cut its global epidemic prevention efforts by 80 percent , radically downsizing its operations in 39 of the 49 countries it had a presence in , including China and Congo , currently the epicenter of Ebola . Last year , Trump proposed slashing the DHS budget by another 12 percent and the CDC budget by 10 percent .
The result of this dangerous downsizing : As the world stands on the verge of a new epidemic , the United States has 50,000 fewer local public-health employees than it did in 2008 . Instead of stopping an outbreak early , America ’ s now reduced to taking the temperature of travelers at major airports . More Signal : Noise Trump Leads a Government of , by , and for Bullies Sasha Abramsky How Does This White House Stop Lying ? By Not Talking at All . Sasha Abramsky
Talking of airports , this week Customs and Border Protection descended further into lawlessness : When 24-year-old Iranian student Mohammad Shahab Dehghani Hossein Abadi arrived at Boston ’ s Logan Airport on the way to Northeastern University , where he was enrolled , he was detained . The ACLU secured a court order blocking his deportation—but instead of abiding by the order , CBP simply bundled him onto a plane and flew him back to Iran .
Trump ’ s use of immigration as a wedge issue this election season is intensifying ; now he ’ s boasting that he plans to dramatically expand his Muslim travel ban . According to press reports , he may even include non-Muslim-majority countries such as Belarus and Myanmar . And now the State Department has given US embassies abroad the power to deny visas to pregnant women , arguing that they would otherwise take advantage of birthright citizenship laws .
The last Signal today is the Guantánamo trials , in which the architects of the US torture programs have testified for the first time on the witness stand . The testimony of psychologist Dr. James Mitchell—one of two designers of the waterboarding and broader torture regime—explaining and defending the use of torture , and detailing how he invited CIA officials to witness the pain-infliction methods they were ordering him to administer , is some of the most chilling courtroom evidence I have ever read . It shows , in intimate detail , how the US government embraced criminal methods in the wake of 9/11 . Mitchell ’ s argument on the witness stand that the ends justify the means is as morally cretinous as some of the testimony from Nazi bureaucrats during the Nuremberg trials .
And now back to the Noise : As I wrap up this column , the House managers are about to start day two of their case against the president . But if yesterday ’ s antics are anything to go by , several GOP senators will forgo their constitutional duty to listen to the evidence and leave the hearings to appear on Fox News to defend the president ’ s “ perfect ” phone call .