Far from being discouraged by the Supreme Court decision upholding the federal health care overhaul , Republican governors are cranking up opposition to the law 's implementation -- refusing to carry out two key provisions in the hope November 's election will give the party enough votes to repeal it .
The list of GOP governors who have announced they will not move forward on the law has grown significantly since the high court ruling last Thursday .
At least 18 governors now say they are at least considering not expanding Medicaid -- effectively exploiting the one part of the ruling that came down in Republicans ' favor . Previously , the law called on states to expand their Medicaid rolls and threatened to withhold money to those states that did not agree . The Supreme Court nixed that prescribed punishment , taking away the federal government 's stick .
Aside from resisting the Medicaid expansion , several GOP governors have also said they will not move forward on creating so-called insurance exchanges . Those exchanges , set to go into effect in 2014 , are meant to be the state-based marketplaces where strictly regulated insurance plans will be available for purchase .
States , though , have made little progress toward that call . According to a detailed list maintained by the Kaiser Family Foundation , just 15 states are in the process of setting them up .
In the wake of last Thursday 's ruling , GOP-led states in particular are digging in their heels on both fronts .
Louisiana Gov . Bobby Jindal told ███ on Tuesday that he wants governors to `` stand up and say no . ''
`` It makes no sense . This is a bad law , '' he said . Jindal is among the governors who have vowed to block the Medicaid expansion and the set-up of exchanges .
`` We 're not expanding Medicaid . We 're not implementing the health exchange . Instead we 're going to do everything we can to elect Mitt Romney to repeal this bad law and replace it , '' he told ███ .
Wisconsin Gov . Scott Walker and Florida Gov . Rick Scott -- whose state was pivotal in the health care lawsuit and who was a major opponent of the bill dating back to its infancy -- are on the same page .
Scott told ███ earlier that he does not believe the rest of the law will take effect in 2014 . And he too said Florida will not go forward with the Medicaid expansion . Though states that opt in would receive federal help , Scott warned that any federal aid would eventually be cut back .
`` We 're not going to implement that , '' he told ███ . `` We just ca n't afford it . ''
New Jersey Gov . Chris Christie on Tuesday told ███ that his state will consider its options when it comes to the exchanges . Under the law , states have the option to either set up their own exchanges or leave that to the federal government .
`` We 're going to consider both of those options , '' Christie said .
But the governor said he sees little need to go much further on Medicaid .
`` Medicaid is pretty well expanded in our state already because of the legacy of previous Democratic governors , and so I do n't think there 's a lot more for us to do in New Jersey in that regard , '' he said .
Meanwhile , Republicans in Congress are weighing their options -- teeing up votes on yet another bill to repeal the law as well as one that reportedly would bar the IRS from receiving federal dollars to implement the law .
The Obama administration is pleading with the law 's critics to move on in the wake of the high court ruling .
On `` ███ Sunday , '' White House Chief of Staff Jacob Lew said governors who do n't implement parts of the law will `` have to answer to the people in their state . ''
`` I , for the life of me , do n't understand why a governor would refuse to let the people in their state take advantage of Medicaid coverage that is 100 percent paid for out of the federal budget , '' Lew said , while acknowledging the federal aid declines slightly in later years .
`` I think the vast majority of states will come in right away . That is the right thing to do , that is what I think most states will do , '' he said . Lew said states should have `` a lot of flexibility , '' but said he hopes `` the states come around . ''