But there is noticeable frustration with the White House from some . State Senator Nan Rich , a Democrat running for governor in 2014 , said the administration needed to do a better job of countering state-level opposition .
“ The Obama administration needs to be more forceful in going out there and explaining what is true and what ’ s not , ” she said .
Despite the governor ’ s statements , leaders of the Republican-controlled state Legislature have not outright rejected the expansion , saying they will study their options over the coming months before making a decision .
“ At the end of the day , we are going to take a rational approach that reflects the interests of Floridians , protects their hard-earned tax dollars and uses common sense , ” said Representative Will Weatherford , the incoming House speaker .
That more measured approach may reflect , in part , mixed public sentiment about the health care law . The boos that met Mitt Romney ’ s vow to repeal the law in a speech on Wednesday at the N.A.A.C.P . ’ s annual convention in Houston were a reminder that while Republicans believe strident opposition is a winning strategy , it may not be so clear-cut .
Mr. Scott describes Medicaid as a dysfunctional program , saying the portion of the state budget devoted to it is growing at more than three and a half times the rate of general revenues . The program currently costs about $ 21 billion a year in Florida , with the federal government covering 55 percent , and serves about 3.2 million people . Childless adults are generally not eligible but would be under the expansion .
All told , the expansion would add some 17 million people to the Medicaid rolls nationally , including perhaps one million or more in Florida .
Under the law , the federal government would pay the full cost of each state ’ s expansion for the first three years , starting in 2014 , and gradually decrease its share to 90 percent in 2020 and beyond . Last week , Mr. Scott said in national television interviews that the state would owe an additional $ 1.9 billion a year if , as the law calls for , it expanded Medicaid to everyone with incomes up to 133 percent of the poverty level . That is currently about $ 15,000 for a single person and $ 31,000 for a family of four .
Mr. Scott has since backed off the $ 1.9 billion estimate ; his spokesman , Lane Wright , said he had based it on an outdated report . But the state is still anticipating high costs , partly because it expects that a number of people who are currently eligible for Medicaid but have not signed up will do so , a concern shared by other states . The federal government would pay a lower share of the cost for that group .
In Florida , the federal government would contribute a total of $ 20 billion for the newly eligible group from 2014 through 2019 , according to the Kaiser Family Foundation , a nonpartisan research group . The foundation estimates Florida ’ s share of the expansion costs at between $ 1.2 billion and $ 2.5 billion from 2014 through 2019 , depending on how many of those newly eligible for Medicaid actually enroll .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
Without the expansion , Mr. Rueben and others in the health care industry said , the cost of uncompensated care — emergency treatment for those who are uninsured and can not afford to pay — will continue to spiral upward and more costs will be shifted to the insured . Jackson Health System , the safety-net hospital system in Miami , provided more than $ 450 million in uncompensated care last year .
For the most part , hospitals are likely to hold their fire until after the election , said Jeff Goldsmith , a health industry analyst based in Virginia . “ If Obama is defeated and the Senate flips , it ’ s all over , ” Mr. Goldsmith said . “ Do you spend a bunch of scarce political capital making people angry now , or wait until things have settled after November ? ”
Although clinics for the poor provide basic care to a constant stream of uninsured patients , those who need more complicated tests or procedures are often out of luck .
Dr. Edwin Bosa-Osorio , chief medical officer at Jessie Trice Community Health Center , which serves several poor neighborhoods in the Miami area , said it can take more than a year for his patients to get diagnostic tests or consultations even at Jackson , the safety-net hospital system , because it is so overburdened .
As a result , Dr. Bosa-Osorio said , the center ’ s doctors too often have to take “ the Plan B approach to a condition . ”
For Tracy Similien , a 22-year-old student who injured her hip in a fall several years ago and still has frequent searing pain , that means relying on Tylenol instead of seeing an orthopedist or neurologist .
Fatima Zafar , Ms. Similien ’ s primary care doctor at Jessie Trice , said another of her patients has uterine fibroids that make her anemic and weak . She needs a hysterectomy , Dr. Zafar said , but is on a waiting list for it at Jackson . About 23 percent of Jessie Trice patients have Medicaid and can thus be referred to other hospitals that offer quicker appointments ; most of the rest are uninsured . “ You feel very limited in your scope , ” Dr. Zafar said .
In a letter to governors on Tuesday , Kathleen Sebelius , the health and human services secretary , urged them to take advantage of “ the unusually generous federal resources ” and move ahead with expansions .
But State Senator Joe Negron , a Republican who is vice chairman of the Senate Budget Committee , said he was skeptical that the federal government could continue to pay for most of the expansion indefinitely given the size of the deficit .
“ Medicaid should be a last-resort safety-net program and not a mechanism to reduce the number of uninsured , ” he said . “ We have to hope our economy keeps improving and more people get back to work and therefore would have access to private health insurance . ”