Republican lawmakers pounced on Wednesday 's dismal ObamaCare enrollment report , arguing that the scant participation demonstrates the law has failed , as Senate Democrats prepared to meet with White House officials amid concerns over the fallout from health policy cancellations prompted by the law .
House Speaker John Boehner said the report , which falls far short of the administration 's goal for health insurance exchange enrollments , underscores the `` urgent need for President Obama to allow people to keep the plans they have and like . ''
`` Above all , this report is a symbol of the failure of the president 's health care law , '' Boehner said in a statement . `` It is a rolling calamity that must be scrapped . ''
The Department of Health and Human Services reported Wednesday that more than 100,000 people have selected a health care plan through the ObamaCare exchanges . The administration had originally hoped to sign up a half-million people in the first month of open enrollment .
Now more than six weeks into the troubled launch of HealthCare.gov and other state-based exchanges , HHS announced Wednesday that 106,185 people had selected a plan as of Nov. 2 . And just 27,000 did so via the federal exchanges .
House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Rep. Dave Camp , R-Mich. , pressed the administration for more enrollee data , including a breakdown of who is signing up , what kind of coverage they are purchasing and what the high risk insurance pools look like .
“ With the little data we have so far , I fear we could see a fundamental breakdown of the insurance market with coverage gaps and skyrocketing premiums – pricing millions of Americans out of health care , yet still forced to pay the individual mandate tax , '' Camp said in a statement .
Wednesday 's announcement had been highly anticipated , as lawmakers have been pressing the administration for weeks on official figures . But even the statistic revealed on Wednesday might be inflated .
The administration said the figure counts all those who have selected a health care plan from state and federal exchanges , even if they have n't yet paid a premium on those plans .
One source explained to ███ that no one is really `` enrolled '' until the insurance company knows about it .
After the announcement , Sen. Chuck Grassley , R-Iowa , said it would not surprise him if the enrollment figures are inflated , suggesting the Obama administration `` might be putting a rosier spin on the numbers than the reality . ''
`` The President should admit what a disaster it is , '' Grassley said in a statement . `` He should work with Congress on something bipartisan that would address health insurance problems without disrupting what does work in our health care system .
Still , the numbers announced Wednesday stand as the most definitive account to date from the administration of how many people have been able to wade through the problem-plagued website and pick a plan .
The administration says a total of 975,407 applied for coverage and received an eligibility determination , but have not yet selected a plan . In addition to the 106,185 who have selected a plan , another 396,261 have been determined as eligible for Medicaid or a similar government program for children .
A closer look at the numbers , though , shows how problems with HealthCare.gov have hampered the ability of would-be customers to enroll . Though the administration says the website is being fixed and it 's getting better by the day , the stats show only 27,000 people signed up via the federally run exchanges . The state-run exchanges , which use different websites , signed up roughly 79,000 . More than half of those sign-ups came from California and New York .
In addition to the website problems , the administration is grappling with widespread complaints about insurance policies being cancelled due to ObamaCare restrictions .
House Democrats have delivered a fix-it-or-else ultimatum to President Obama , giving his administration until Friday to find an affordable solution for the millions of Americans losing their health plans under the law -- or risk some Democrats backing a Republican solution .
Obama has said he 's sorry that people are losing their coverage and has vowed to find ways to address `` holes and gaps '' in the law . Advisers originally said the White House was considering administrative fixes , not legislative options .
On Wednesday , Obama spokesman Jay Carney said , `` If we can achieve this administratively , we will certainly look at that possibility , '' but he added that the White House was also considering legislative ideas .
Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid , D-Nev. , scheduled an all-Democrats meeting Thursday with White House health care officials .
Republicans , meanwhile , are holding hearings to keep the overhaul 's problems in the spotlight ahead of an election year .
`` It 's kind of interesting to see as Obamacare implodes how everybody 's running for cover , '' said Rep. John Mica , R-Fla. And Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky said , `` Obviously , panic has set in on the other side . ''
Three more swing state Senate Democrats seeking re-election in 2014 signed onto legislation drafted by Sen. Mary Landrieu of Louisiana to ensure that anyone liking their current coverage would be able to keep it , an attempt to resolve the issue of cancellations .
In the House , meanwhile , majority Republicans set a vote for Friday on legislation to permit insurance companies to continue selling existing policies that have been ordered scrapped because they fall short of coverage standards in the law .