Last year , when presidential candidate Donald Trump hammered the Affordable Care Act as `` a fraud , '' `` a total disaster '' and `` very bad health insurance , '' many Americans seemed to agree with him .
Now that President Trump and fellow Republicans are attempting to keep their promise to get rid of the law , voters increasingly seem to be having second thoughts .
Multiple polls show rising support for the ACA , including one from the Pew Research Center and one from the Wall Street Journal/NBC News indicating Americans feel more positively about it than ever .
True , many still dislike the law known as Obamacare , but as the national conversation swells on the fate of a law that affects millions of people in multifaceted ways — and the issue takes center stage at raucous town hall meetings — it 's increasingly clear that many do n't see the ACA as an either-or proposition .
`` At first it was a good deal — that was three or four years ago , '' says Mark Bunkosky , 56 , an independent contractor in Michigan who buys coverage through one of the law 's online portals . `` Every year it 's gone up . From where it started , the premium has doubled , and now my deductible has also doubled . And my income has not doubled . ''
Bunkosky , a Republican , views the ACA unfavorably but believes Washington should fix it , not toss it . He supports keeping some of the law 's Medicaid coverage for low-income people and its prohibition on discriminating against those with pre-existing conditions .
This week , Trump acknowledged that health care is `` so complicated . '' So are voter opinions on what to do next with the ACA , which expanded coverage to some 20 million people .
`` I did n't like that it mandated people to carry health insurance . And I thought it was just a lie '' when it promised affordability , says Amber Alexander , 27 , a Pennsylvania independent whose seasonal income puts her on Medicaid in winter and a commercial plan the rest of the year .
However , she adds , `` I do n't think it should be thrown out altogether . There are people that do benefit from it , but there are also a lot of people that get screwed . ''
Carol Friendly , 67 , an Oregon Republican , voted for Hillary Clinton for president and favors the Medicaid expansion . She objects to the ACA 's reproductive health coverage , though , saying consumers opposed to birth control and abortion should n't have to pay for them .
On the other hand , she says , `` I know it put 22 million [ people ] in the health care system that were n't there before . So that 's a plus . ''
For weeks , Trump has been promising — but not yet producing — a blueprint detailing his plan to repeal and replace the ACA with `` insurance for everybody . '' In his address to Congress on Tuesday , he said a new law `` should ensure that Americans with pre-existing conditions have access to coverage . ''
Meanwhile , a leaked GOP congressional draft replacement bill would shrink coverage subsidies , and House conservatives complained even those were still too expensive . On Tuesday , congressional Republicans told reporters they were still working on `` the best way to build a consensus to pass a bill to gut Obamacare . ''
For many helped by the health law , such a prospect has focused minds and aroused fears and may account for its rising popularity , says Simon Haeder , a political science professor and specialist on health policy at West Virginia University .
`` Now that we have this whole debate on replacing , repealing , repairing — whatever you want to call it — more and more of this information is coming out on what the ACA does and how it 's benefited people , '' he says .
ACA beneficiaries and activists flooded town halls held by Republican congressmen last week , urging them not to repeal the law .
`` My story thus far has been [ of ] one who has benefited from the system , '' says Michael Bilodeau , 39 , who attended two town halls held by California Republican Rep. Tom McClintock . `` We are able to see our local doctor , who we like . And our premiums have been , I would say , stable . ''
He co-owns a small business with his wife and is on a plan from Covered California , the state 's online marketplace . He fears a big change if the ACA goes away .
`` One of the Republicans ' major arguments is that the ACA brought disruption to people 's health care , '' Bilodeau says . `` It feels like we 're headed toward another disruption . ''
Also , many middle- and lower-income Republicans benefit from the health law 's Medicaid expansion and marketplace subsidies . That 's a political hazard for Republicans who would abolish it , says Mark Peterson , a political science professor at UCLA .
`` A lot of that base would be most adversely affected by repealing the ACA and replacing it with something that left enormous holes for the working class , '' he says .
And while many national Republican policymakers have excoriated it , the Medicaid expansion is supported by some GOP governors .
Some Republican voters object to the ACA because it 's just so complex .
`` It would have been better if the federal government had said , 'Look , to get these 20 million insured let 's just expand Medicaid nationwide and let 's leave everybody else alone , '' says Rickey Mathis , 56 , a Georgian who voted for Trump and has n't had insurance since the factory employing him closed in 2012 . `` Why did they have to screw up the whole country 's health insurance ? ''
Michigan contractor Bunkosky urges Republicans to think hard about any Obamacare replacement .
`` Everybody 's in a hurry for it , but they need to sit down and do it right , '' he says . `` Some of it is still a good idea . ''
Kaiser Health News is an editorially independent news service that is part of the nonpartisan Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation .