The administration likely wo n't meet its goal of 7 million sign-ups , but 6 million is possible . Obamacare finally clears the tower
The Obamacare rollout is changing in front of our eyes — turning from a running joke into one big shoulder shrug .
And that ’ s good news for the White House , because at this point , even basic competence is good news .
That ’ s the lesson of the new enrollment numbers the administration released Monday , which showed that more than 3 million people signed up for private health coverage under President Barack Obama ’ s health care law by the end of January . It ’ s behind the original expectations , but way ahead of the disaster scenarios that had looked possible during the worst months of the troubled rollout last fall .
There are still reasons to be skeptical of the numbers , and health care experts warn that the administration still has a lot of work to do by the end of March — when enrollment ends for this year — to get the right mix of customers so there are enough healthy people to pay for the sicker ones .
But the new report is good enough that it might reset Washington ’ s expectations : maybe Obamacare isn ’ t going to be a train wreck after all . Maybe it ’ ll be more like one of those Metro trains that runs kind of slowly , and sometimes stops in the middle of the tracks for no apparent reason , but eventually gets you where you need to go .
Back in October , it looked like Obamacare enrollment could end up as a total bust . Just 106,000 people had signed up , and it looked like a stretch to get even a few million by the end of March .
Now , the disaster scenario is already off the table . By the end of January , 3.3 million Americans had selected a private health insurance plan . That ’ s a 1.1 million increase over the December figures , and it shows that people were still signing up at a pretty fast pace , even though December was supposed to be one of the peak months as everyone rushed to sign up for January coverage .
The enrollment is now “ large enough for the market to function , ” said Jonathan Gruber , the MIT health economist who consulted on Obamacare and the Massachusetts health reform law that preceded it . The first test the health care law had to pass was to get enough customers to avoid financial instability , he said , and “ we ’ re already past that . ”
And for once , HealthCare.gov — the federal enrollment website that had the bungled launch — actually did better than the state-run websites . The federal website , which serves 36 states , had a 62 percent increase in signups in January . The state websites , in 14 states and the District of Columbia , only upped their numbers by 42 percent .
“ The federal marketplace finally seems to be getting its sea legs , ” said Larry Levitt of the Kaiser Family Foundation .
Jon Kingsdale , a consultant who ran the Massachusetts health insurance exchange that became the model for Obamacare , called the new numbers “ very encouraging , ” because it means enrollment didn ’ t slow down in January as many analysts had expected . It ’ s also a sign that enrollment could stay strong in February and then surge in March as enrollment ends , he said .
Of course , everything is about expectations — which are lower now than they were before the sputtering launch in October .
Are the numbers actually good ? “ It essentially depends whether you ’ re going to give them a pass on the first six weeks ” when the federal website was essentially broken , said Gruber . “ If you start the enrollment season in mid-November , than I think it ’ s outstanding . If you start it in October , it still looks a little behind . ”
And for Obamacare critics , they ’ re not good enough to make up for the disasters of the early months .
“ That ’ s why you talk about how you launched the beautiful new ocean liner , and then it hit the rocks , and then suddenly you ’ re talking about how great it is that you got everyone off the ship before it went down , ” said Douglas Holtz-Eakin of the American Action Forum . “ You have a different set of expectations when it ’ s a rescue operation . ”
They won ’ t hit 7 million — but 6 million is doable
No , the Obama administration is not on track to hit its original enrollment goal : 7 million people in the health insurance exchanges in the first year , based on the Congressional Budget Office projections of how many they ’ d get .
But based on the new numbers , 6 million isn ’ t out of the question , independent analysts say . That ’ s what CBO estimated in its newest projections , released last week , after it factored in all the website problems during the troubled launch .
“ Enrollment appears on-track to reach roughly 6 million by the end of March , ” said Caroline Pearson , vice president at the Avalere Health consulting firm .
Levitt said the Obama administration “ could very easily reach or exceed ” 6 million — but it depends how much outreach it ’ s able to do in the last two months of enrollment , he said , as well as how much insurers are willing to spend on advertising to attract as many customers as they can get .
Two important points the new numbers don ’ t tell us , though : How many of these customers were uninsured before , and how many are just replacing health insurance policies that were canceled because of , well , Obamacare .
On a conference call with reporters , Obama administration officials said they don ’ t have that information . But not to worry , they said — they ’ re focused on getting as many people to sign up as they possibly can .