In rural Baker County , Ga. , where there is only one insurer , a 50-year-old shopping for a silver plan would pay at least $ 644.05 before federal subsidies . ( Plans range in price and levels of coverage from bronze to platinum , with silver a middle option . ) A 50-year-old in Atlanta , where there are four carriers , could pay $ 320.06 for a comparable plan . Federal subsidies could significantly reduce monthly premiums for people with low incomes .
Counties with one carrier are mostly concentrated in the South . Nearly all of the counties in Mississippi and Alabama , for example , are served by just one insurer , according to The Times ’ s analysis . Other states with scarce competition include Maine , West Virginia , North Carolina and Alaska .
“ The consumer wants some level of choice , ” said Alexander K. Feldvebel , the deputy insurance commissioner for New Hampshire , where one carrier , Anthem Blue Cross , owned by WellPoint , now offers plans . “ You don ’ t have that when you have a single carrier offering all the products . ”
The Times examined carriers and prices on the federal exchanges for the second-cheapest silver plan , the level on which subsidies are based , available to a 50-year-old . Comparable data for state-run plans was unavailable .
The Obama administration , while not disputing the findings , responded to the analysis in a statement that the marketplaces “ allow insurers to compete for customers based on price and quality. ” It added that the tax-credit subsidies that will lower monthly payments for many consumers had also “ brought more companies to the market , resulting in increased options for consumers and lower-than-expected premiums . ”
Insurance executives say they set their rates without knowing what other insurers were doing .
“ No one knew who was going to file , ” said Barbara Morales Burke , an executive with BlueCross BlueShield of North Carolina , the only insurer offering coverage in 61 of the state ’ s 100 counties . “ We developed the rates we always do based on actuarial information and reasonable estimates . ”
The Affordable Care Act , which was passed in 2010 , was designed to make health insurance available to people who had not been able to afford it or had been denied coverage because of pre-existing conditions . It has transformed the market for individual insurance by creating marketplaces aimed at making it easier for consumers to compare their options . The law also sought to level the playing field for new insurers .