Senate Republicans are returning to Washington increasingly pessimistic about their plan to repeal and replace ObamaCare .
They ’ ve had to put off plans for a vote next week , and they ’ ve seen loyal members either double down on their opposition to the bill , or at least question whether they will back it .
Sen. Jerry Moran Gerald ( Jerry ) MoranOvernight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran Senate again votes to end Trump emergency declaration on border wall Pompeo pressed on possible Senate run by Kansas media MORE ( R-Kansas ) —a “ no ” vote that took many in Washington by surprise—distanced himself the closed-door process used to draft the Senate bill .
“ It takes two parties who want to come together . Not just Republicans . Not just Democrats , ” he said during a polite , but pointed , meeting with constituents in rural Kansas .
Asked if he could support the bill , Sen. Chuck Grassley Charles ( Chuck ) Ernest GrassleyIntel community watchdog appears to push back on Trump allegations of changes to whistleblower rules GOP senators urge Barr to probe Clinton , Ukraine GOP senator : Trump has changed presidency 'not necessarily toward the positive ' MORE ( R-Iowa ) told constituents that “ I do n't know if we 're even going to get a bill up , ” according to the Des Moines Register .
Sen. John Hoeven John Henry HoevenBottom Line Poll : McConnell is most unpopular senator McConnell ups pressure on White House to get a budget deal MORE ( R-N.D. ) , who normally aligns with leadership , also came out as “ no ” over the recess break .
Even Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell Addison ( Mitch ) Mitchell McConnellOvernight Defense : Dems subpoena Giuliani for Ukraine docs | DOJ says Trump contacted foreign countries over Russia inquiry | Top Armed Services Republican Thornberry to retire | Milley sworn in as top general ███ 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff US sanctions Russian individuals for interference in 2018 elections MORE ( R-Ky. ) appeared to suggest that Republicans might need to move to plan B involving stabilizing insurance markets if they can ’ t pass their bill .
“ If my side is unable to agree on an adequate replacement , then some kind of action with regard to private health insurance markets must occur , ” he said at a Rotary Club meeting in Kentucky .
The gloomy outlook highlights why McConnell had sought to finish work on the repeal-and-replace legislation before the July 4 recess .
McConnell didn ’ t want his members to face additional pressure over the break , and he also wasn ’ t keen on spending more time on healthcare . His conference now faces a marathon three-week session to take action on the issue .
The caucus remains deeply divided with rank-and-file members signaling they don ’ t believe they are close to a deal that could capture 50 votes .
“ We 're still several weeks away from a vote , I think , ” Sen. Pat Toomey ( R-Pa. ) said a televised Q & A event , while dozens of protesters urged him to oppose the Senate bill .
Moran added that there wasn ’ t “ significant consensus ” on how to fix healthcare .
“ [ It ’ s ] almost impossible to try to solve when you 're trying to do it with 51 votes in the United States Senate , in which there is not significant consensus on what the end result ought to be , ” he said .
Leadership held a flurry of closed-door negotiations before the recess as they tried to reach deals that would win over undecided lawmakers , including adding more money for opioid treatment .
With a slim 52-seat majority , McConnell can only afford to lose two GOP senators and still let Vice President Pence break a tie . With Hoeven ’ s defection there are roughly 10 GOP senators publicly opposed to the bill .
“ Compared to how optimistic I was the week before now ... I ’ m very pessimistic , ” Grassley told constituents in Mount Pleasant , Iowa , before adding that he thinks Congress will get something done even if repeal now and replace later .
Republicans have campaigned for years on repealing and replacing ObamaCare , arguing the Affordable Care Act is “ failing ” and in a “ death spiral , ” and insisting that the law is not fixable .
McConnell ’ s staff were quick to note that the GOP leader ’ s comments are similar to remarks he made after a closed-door meeting with Senate Republicans and Trump at the White House . But the pivot comes as McConnell is trying to wrangle his caucus behind his legislation even as conservatives appear to be digging in for a fight .
If the warning was meant to be a signal to unruly Republicans that it was either the Senate bill or working with Democrats , there was no sign they had an immediate impact .
A few hours after McConnell ’ s comments , Sen. Rand Paul Randal ( Rand ) Howard PaulSenate passes stopgap spending bill , sending it to Trump Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran Senate again votes to end Trump emergency declaration on border wall MORE ( R-Ky. ) , a conservative opponent of the Senate bill who believes it would leave too much of ObamaCare in place , held a press conference to tout his proposal to loosen rules on association healthcare plans .
“ No , none . We ’ ve reached out to Senate Republican leadership , ” Paul told reporters . “ We ’ ve described some of the things with the association plans ... and we have not gotten any feedback . Now I talked to the president about it , and he was very receptive . ”
Conservatives are also demanding an amendment from Sen. Ted Cruz Rafael ( Ted ) Edward CruzHillicon Valley : Treasury sanctions Russians over 2018 election meddling | How Facebook fought back on FTC fine | WeWork calls off IPO | Elon Musk unveils Mars rocket Cambridge Analytica whistleblower 's book coming out next week O'Rourke : Trump should resign MORE ( R-Texas ) that would allow insurers to sell plans that don ’ t meet ObamaCare regulations .
But the demand has riled GOP aides and other members of the caucus , who are accusing Cruz of making unrealistic demands that can ’ t get 50 votes . GOP leadership has sent two versions of their bill to the CBO , one that would include Cruz ’ s proposal and one without .
Just hours after McConnell ’ s comments , Cruz became the latest GOP senator to call for simply repealing ObamaCare without a replacement plan as a plan B .
“ We have had – for seven years – we have promised to do that , ” Cruz said . “ Repealing Obamacare was the single biggest factor producing a Republican House , a Republican Senate and , I think , ultimately a Republican president . ”
The move would either require Republicans to get 60 votes for a replacement plan or use the fiscal year 2018 budget as a vehicle , scrapping their plans for tax reform .
Senate GOP leadership has signaled the idea is a non-starter even after it got the backing of Trump and a growing number of senators .
Sen. Ben Sasse ( R-Neb . ) told local reporters that he was willing to see if McConnell could “ get the ball across the finish line ” by the time lawmakers return to Washington , but if not he supported separating repeal and replace .
“ If we ca n't get this done instead of walking away from either repeal or replace ... I do n't want that to happen , ” he said . “ So I think it would be a more prudent legislative step to unbundle repeal and replace . ”