President Donald Trump called top Senate Democrat Chuck Schumer on Friday to try to revive healthcare legislation — worrying Republicans , Axios reported .
Trump confirmed his phone call with Schumer early Saturday morning after tweeting , `` I called Chuck Schumer yesterday to see if the Dems want to do a great HealthCare Bill . ObamaCare is badly broken , big premiums . Who knows ! ''
I called Chuck Schumer yesterday to see if the Dems want to do a great HealthCare Bill . ObamaCare is badly broken , big premiums . Who knows ! — Donald J. Trump ( @ realDonaldTrump ) October 7 , 2017
Axios attributed its report to `` Republican sources . '' Trump was seeking `` a path forward on healthcare , '' the source said .
The contents of the call were not reported , but word about it circulated quickly on Capitol Hill , Axios reported .
`` It codifies the Rs ' failure on repeal-replace and shows the president can move without hesitation or ideological impediment to make a deal with the Dems , '' one `` well-wired Republican '' told Axios , apparently in an email .
`` It depresses R base turnout in the mid-terms , as Trump voters are further disconnected from the congressional wing . ''
President Trump 's promise to repeal and replace Obamacare has gone unfulfilled , as Republicans have repeatedly failed to pass legislation to end the Affordable Care Act after vowing to do so since it was passed in 2010 .
Also Friday , the administration rolled back Obamacare 's controversial birth-control mandate , allowing virtually any employer to claim a religious or moral objection to paying for contraceptives .
The Axios report could indicate that Trump is prepared to reach out to Democrats to move his healthcare agenda forward .
Last month , Trump sided with Democrats on a three-month extension of the debt limit and a $ 15.25 billion bill to provide relief to Hurricane Harvey victims .
He reached the deal after meeting at the White House with congressional leaders , later telling reporters that the deal would be `` very good . ''
Schumer , the Senate 's minority leader and New York Democrat , and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California , attended the meeting .
Trump had dismissed the arguments of fellow Republicans — including Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and House Speaker Paul Ryan of Wisconsin — who sought a longer debt extension .
The president also met with Schumer and Pelosi over dinner at the White House , after which the Democrats announced that the president was supporting legislation for the expiring Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program .
The Democrats said Trump agreed to exclude his demand for a border wall from any DACA agreement .
The White House , however , disputed that claim — and Trump later declared `` if we do n't have a wall , we 're doing nothing . ''
The previous week , Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced Trump was giving Congress six months to find a permanent solution to DACA , which was enacted by former President Barack Obama in 2012 via executive order .