Sen. John McCain John Sidney McCainCindy McCain : I can see Arizona 'going Democrat ' in 2020 Ukraine scandal shows that foreign influence is a bipartisan affair America 's newest comedy troupe : House GOP MORE ’ s ( R-Ariz. ) announcement that he will oppose the latest GOP ObamaCare repeal bill has left both parties wondering about the health care law ’ s future .
Some Republicans are still pushing for repeal , given the tiny chance that they could still scrounge up enough votes before Sept. 30 , the deadline for using budgetary rules that prevent a filibuster on the measure .
Vice President Pence said Friday that he and President Trump are “ undeterred ” in their effort to repeal the law , while Democrats say that they are on guard and will keep up the pressure .
But it seems more likely that the debate could be moving into a new stage .
Democrats are pushing for bipartisan talks in the Senate Health Committee , which Republicans shut down earlier this week .
McCain cited those talks in opposing the new bill , and Trump has given more nods toward working with Democrats in recent weeks . The president also wants to turn to tax reform , which is taking up an increasing amount of his workload .
A key issue in the bipartisan talks would be addressing payments known as cost-sharing reductions that help insurers provide coverage to low- and middle-income people .
Trump has threatened to cancel those payments in an effort to make ObamaCare “ implode. ” And he still could .
The bipartisan Senate talks were aimed at providing congressional approval for those funds to cement their legality and prevent Trump from canceling them . Insurers say that step would be critical in giving them certainty and preventing premium increases .
Sen. Lamar Alexander Andrew ( Lamar ) Lamar AlexanderGOP battens down the hatches after release of Trump whistleblower complaint Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran Senate again votes to end Trump emergency declaration on border wall MORE ( R-Tenn. ) , chairman of the Health Committee and the lead Republican negotiator , has not yet commented after McCain ’ s announcement .
It is highly unlikely that an end to the ObamaCare repeal effort would usher in an era of bipartisanship on health care .
House conservatives and liberal Democrats in the House and Senate have very different ideas on how to move forward on health care , something underlined by a CNN debate scheduled for Monday . Its participants include Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersUkraine whistleblower coverage has n't impacted Biden favorability : poll Saagar Enjeti calls Warren 's credibility into question Krystal Ball : Potential Ocasio-Cortez endorsement of Sanders would be ' a no-brainer ' MORE ( I-Vt. ) , whose single-payer system is gaining steam with Democrats , and the authors of the latest GOP ObamaCare repeal bill , Sens . Bill Cassidy William ( Bill ) Morgan CassidyTo win the federal paid family leave debate , allow states to lead the way Democrats divided on surprise medical bill fix America 's newest comedy troupe : House GOP MORE ( La . ) and Lindsey Graham Lindsey Olin GrahamIntel community watchdog appears to push back on Trump allegations of changes to whistleblower rules Democrats demand Barr , senior officials testify on Ukraine ███ 's 12:30 Report : Trump steps up attacks on whistleblower , Schiff MORE ( S.C. ) .
Without any bipartisan action or a final long-shot repeal attempt , ObamaCare , which has extended coverage to roughly 20 million people , will remain on the books .
Despite worries that there would be counties next year without any insurance options , insurers have stepped in to fill every area . Standard & Poors found in July that ObamaCare markets are “ stabilizing . ”
Democrats believe there are plenty of risks to the law , however , as long as Trump is in the White House .
They accuse the president of threatening to “ sabotage ” the law — both with his threats on the insurer payments and a 90 percent cut to funds used to advertise and enroll people in the insurance exchanges .
Within hours of McCain ’ s statement on Friday , Democrats were pointing to an announcement that the administration would be taking healthcare.gov offline from 12 a.m. to 12 p.m. every Sunday during the enrollment period .
“ More sabotage of our health care system , ” Matt House , a spokesman for Senate Democratic Leader Chuck Schumer Charles ( Chuck ) Ellis SchumerSchumer : Trump 's reported Russian meddling remarks among 'most disturbing things ' yet Senate Democrats say top NRA officials knew about Kremlin ties Office of Director of National Intelligence not planning to release whistleblower complaint MORE ( N.Y. ) , wrote on Twitter .
A spokesman for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said the downtime is part of regularly scheduled “ maintenance outages ” that happen every year . “ This year is no different , ” the spokesman said .
Frederick Isasi , executive director of Families USA , a leading pro-ObamaCare group , said that repeal is still a “ very , very real threat for millions and millions of Americans . ”
But beyond that threat , he warned : “ It 's a real concern that the administration is trying to sabotage the ability of Americans to get high-quality affordable coverage . ”
He warned that if enrollment efforts fall off , fewer healthy people will be enrolled in ObamaCare , which will harm the long-term sustainability of the exchanges .
McCain ’ s opposition is a major blow to the seven-year effort to repeal the law .
It almost certainly dooms the current legislation , given opposition to the bill from Sen. Rand Paul Randal ( Rand ) Howard PaulSenate passes stopgap spending bill , sending it to Trump Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Furor over White House readout of Ukraine call | Dems seize on memo in impeachment push | Senate votes to end Trump emergency | Congress gets briefing on Iran Senate again votes to end Trump emergency declaration on border wall MORE ( R-Ky. ) , and Sen. Susan Collins Susan Margaret CollinsYes , President Trump , we do have a homelessness crisis and you 're making it harder for us to address The policy-driven presidential campaign could be drowned out by impeachment Flake tells GOP : Trump 'does not deserve reelection ' MORE ( R-Maine ) said in a statement that she is leaning against it . Collins is seen as a long-shot to vote for repeal , and Republicans can only afford two defections .
It ’ s also possible there are other GOP senators who do not want to back the bill .
It ’ s of course still possible Republicans could make another effort at repeal either before or after Sept. 30 .
Sen. Orrin Hatch Orrin Grant HatchTrump to award racing legend Roger Penske with Presidential Medal of Freedom Trump awards Presidential Medal of Freedom to economist , former Reagan adviser Arthur Laffer Second ex-Senate staffer charged in aiding doxxing of GOP senators MORE ( R-Utah ) has even floated the idea of pairing ObamaCare repeal with tax reform under a new budget resolution that would again allow Republicans to avoid a Democratic filibuster .
Yet such a plan would put tax reform at risk , something that seems unlikely at this stage .
Rep. Mark Meadows ( R-N.C. ) , chairman of the conservative House Freedom Caucus , sounded a note of disappointment but did not criticize McCain after his announcement .
“ Certainly today 's news is not a positive sign for people yearning for lower insurance premiums but to criticize Senator McCain would be to allow my disappointment to manifest itself in a manner that wo n't produce a different outcome , ” Meadows said . “ Amendments and a floor vote should still be allowed . ”