Some 10,000 baby boomers will retire every day for the next 19 years , including many doctors . But at the same time , more people will be looking for health providers under ObamaCare -- meaning there could be a potentially wide numbers gap between those seeking treatment and those available to provide it .
Dr. Jeff Cain , President of the American Academy of Family Physicians , explains , '' we have an increasing population , we have more Americans that are getting older that need more health care . And with the 30 million Americans that are newly insured with the affordable health care act , more people are looking for primary care . ''
In fact , medical colleges predict a huge shortage -- of more than 90,000 physicians by 2020 and a whopping 130,000 or more by 2025 .
Not only that , Cain notes , `` almost a third of family doctors in rural America are thinking about retiring in the next five years . ''
Avik Roy of the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research , a conservative think tank , adds that on top of retiring baby boomer physicians , `` there are a lot of doctors who are just so frustrated ; today with all the bureaucracy involved in taking care of patients that they 're retiring early . ''
Dr. Ramin Oskoui , president of the medical staff at Sibley Hospital in Washington , says `` one of the great misconceptions about ObamaCare is that just because you have health insurance , you 'll therefore get adequate health care and you 'll have access to it . I think nothing could be further from the truth . ''
The health care law did set aside $ 900 million in scholarships for primary care workers and $ 230 million to increase medical residents , nurses and physician assistants , especially nurses .
The president praised the role of nurses recently and said , `` there 's a lot of stuff they can do in a way that , frankly , is cheaper than having a doctor do it , but the outcomes are just as good . ''
Those efforts will create 1700 new primary care workers by 2015 , but analysts argue that wo n't be nearly enough .
John Goodman of the National Center for Policy Analysis in Dallas points to Massachusetts as an example , noting that `` in Boston right now , where they say have universal coverage , the wait for a patient to see a new doctor is two months and that 's the longest wait in the whole country . `` ;
Sen. John Barrasso , R-WY , who is also a doctor , argues `` the health care law put a lot of money into hiring more IRS agents to enforce the law , but not that same kind of focus on training more doctors and nurses and others to take care of patients . ''
Several states have passed laws to let nurses and physician assistants play a larger role , although the American Medical Association opposes such moves .
But those efforts wo n't produce tens of thousands of doctors to confront the tsunami of retiring baby boomers and the newly insured under ObamaCare .