Sarah Kliff : Tell me how all of this got started . How did you , and Jonathan Adler at Case Western Reserve , and other people , start looking into the subsidies as an issue with the Affordable Care Act ?
Michael Cannon : In December 2010 , [ former Department of Justice official ] Tom Christina gave a presentation to the American Enterprise Institute , which I think is the first time we know of anyone noticing that the law says that exchange subsidies are available only `` through an Exchange established by the State . '' There was that , and then Jonathan Adler presented on it at a forum at the University of Kansas in March 2011 . He mentioned it to me in an email in August 2011 .
What ’ s interesting is there were some important muckety-mucks , some really well-known health policy scholars and constitutional law scholars , at the University of Kansas symposium . As Jonathan has told me , none of them batted an eye when he mentioned that feature of law . None of them thought it was absurd .
The administration is telling people , `` Do n't worry . '' Are they out of their minds ?
Anyway , he mentioned it in an email to me and I , at the time , had been encouraging states not to establish exchanges for a number of reasons . I do n't think Jonathan understood the significance of that feature when he told me , maybe because he was n't health care wonk who talked about three-legged stools all the time .
What I recognized was that this allowed states to block one of the three legs of Obamacare ’ s three-legged stool : the subsidies . And they could do so in a way that would increase pressure on Congress to re-open the law . So I started adding that into my list of reasons states shouldn ’ t establish exchanges .
Sarah Kliff : You and Adler initially thought that this was a glitch or a typo , that it was a drafting error where legislators were sloppy and forgot a word . But you ’ ve since become convinced that it was the intention of Congress to withhold subsidies from states that don ’ t build exchanges . How did your viewpoint change on that ?
Michael Cannon : We first thought that it was a mistake , that it was a drafting error . And it is still a glitch in the sense that it ’ s a snag or something that complicates implementation . The reason I didn ’ t initially think they wrote it this way was it would give states a lot of power to block the law .
But we started doing a lot of research into this , the most research that I think anyone has done . And if you look at the tax-credit eligibility rules , they are very tightly worded . It ’ s not in one place , but in two places , it says that the credits are only available `` through an Exchange established by the State . '' Then there are seven different cross-references to that language . They never mentioned any other type of exchange . They never mentioned exchanges generally . It 's all very tightly worded to refer only to exchanges `` established by the State . ''
Then if you look at the legislative history , you 'll find that that was the language in the Finance Committee 's bill and when it passed the Finance Committee . But that bill only had one of those explicit `` Exchanges established by the State '' phrases . They added the other one in Harry Reid 's office while it was being merged with the HELP bill under the direction of the Senate leadership and White House staff — Peter Orszag and Valerie Jarrett and Nancy-Ann DeParle , and everyone else who was going in and out of that room . So this restriction was added to the statute in multiple places at multiple points in the drafting process .
Sarah Kliff : This is where I have trouble sticking with your telling of things . Because my experience covering health care , covering the drafting process you talk about , is that Congress meant for every state to have subsidies . That it ’ s a key leg of the three-legged stool you mention . This is something other people who covered the law , people like Julie Rovner at at Kaiser Health News , agree with me on .
I also spoke to Congressional staffers who worked on the bill . I understand this is not legally binding in any way , but still , they say , `` Of course we meant for all states to have subsidies , regardless of who was providing the exchange . '' Your telling of it , to me , is inaccurate .
Michael Cannon : A couple of things . First , there are a lot of legislators who didn ’ t read or understand this law , but voted for it anyway . The provisions they did not read and did not understand are still law . `` If you like your health plan , you can keep it , '' for example . The Members of Congress who said that either did n't understand what was in this bill or were lying . But either way , it ’ s the law .
What was happening here was , the senators and staff who wrote this language were just trying to put something together that would get 60 votes , so that they could go to conference with the House . To get 60 votes , they needed to create the expectation that states would be running the exchanges . That was crucial to get to 60 votes .
It seems perfectly reasonable to me that some senators or staffers would then say , `` Well , we 'll offer the subsidies only in exchanges established by the state . That will create the necessary incentive for states to do it . '' And there are lots of reasons why they wouldn ’ t even discuss it . They may have believed it ’ s not worth mentioning because all states would establish exchanges even without the incentive . Or it ’ s not worth mentioning because they figured this provision isn ’ t going survive conference .
Would you also agree that at the time , everybody thought that states were going to implement the law ? That everyone thought states were going to establish exchanges ?
Sarah Kliff : This is something I ’ m curious to hear your take on . I think there was always the thought that maybe one or two states could screw up and not be ready to open their exchanges in time . Or you might have a state like Texas , where the legislature only meets every other year , and they couldn ’ t get it authorized in time . Under your reading of what Congress meant to do , was the plan to punish a state that like that by barring subsidies ? That ’ s really hard for me to see , and goes back to my initial point about Congress always expecting all states to have subsidies .
Michael Cannon : States had more than three years to establish exchanges . The strongest evidence we have that Congress expected all states to do so in that timeframe is that Congress provided zero funding for federal exchanges in the law .
It may have been the case that , if this legislation had gone to conference , someone would have objected to the conditional nature of the Senate bill ’ s Exchange subsidies . That someone would have said , `` This would knock out one leg of the three-legged stool ! Did you pay attention to those town hall meetings in August ? We ca n't let the Tea Party grab onto this because they 'll blow up the whole thing ! We have to change that ! ''
But that did n't happen . When Scott Brown won , Democrats only had one bill they could get through Congress . That ’ s how this provision became law .
You did n't ask about it . Julie [ Rovner , a health policy reporter formerly with NPR and currently with Kaiser Health News ] did n't ask about it . That does n't mean that Congress was n't meaning to do it . That does n't mean it 's not the law . It just means that there was so much else going on that no one examined this . No one questioned them on it .
Sarah Kliff : Are you 100 percent convinced it was Congress 's intent to withhold subsidies in the federal exchange ?
Michael Cannon : There are two ways to interpret that question . Did the people who wrote this language mean to withhold subsidies in federal exchanges ? My answer to that is , I 'm 100 percent convinced that they meant to do that .
The other way to think about it is , `` Did the people who voted for this law intend to withhold subsidies in federal exchanges ? '' That ’ s a different question , but the answer is the same . I ’ m 100 percent convinced that ’ s what the members of Congress who enacted this law meant to do , just the same way I ’ m 100 percent convinced they meant to throw people off of their existing health plans even though they said , `` If you like your health plan , you can keep it . ''
What members of Congress might have ideally wanted is different from congressional intent , which is determined by what they actually vote on . If the language of a statute is clear , then that constitutes congressional intent .
Sarah Kliff : What 's the goal of the lawsuit ? Is it to destroy Obamacare ? What do you want this lawsuit to do ?
Michael Cannon : I want the political process to work the way it should have worked back in 2013 [ during the law ’ s implementation ] . Under the law as written , when the states refuse to establish exchanges , that blocks the major taxing and spending provisions in this law . If the president had followed the law , Congress would have addressed that in 2013 .
When the Obama administration decided to go beyond the very clear limits that the law imposes on its authority , the first thing that happened was , it disenfranchised voters in those 36 states that were electing state officials that promised to block the law . When the president rewrote the law that way , he effectively told millions of people , `` Your vote does n't count . '' That 's what this lawsuit is about .
If the Supreme Court rules for the plaintiffs , it will be saying that the president has been violating the law
If you think about it , I ’ ve been exercising whatever power I have in our democracy to educate people about what I thought was the right thing to do . When the president disenfranchised those voters , he kind of disenfranchised me , too . I 'm one of the millions of people to whom he said , `` What you say does n't count . '' That 's my connection to this .
Sarah Kliff : If the Supreme Court rules in your favor , what do you think will happen to Obamacare ?
Michael Cannon : Unfortunately , there 's going to be a lot of dislocation that we would not have seen if the President had followed the law and we 'd addressed all these issues in 2013 .
There are going to be a lot of people who lose their subsidies . The reason it will be so painful for them to lose their subsidies , for most of those people , is because Obamacare increases the cost of the insurance to the point where they ca n't afford it .
Sarah Kliff : You 're also knocking out the individual mandate in a way , too , because so many of these people would qualify for hardship exemptions . They wouldn ’ t be able to afford coverage without the subsidies .
Michael Cannon : Right . They wo n't be able to afford exchange coverage once they are exposed to its full cost . That will be painful . But they also wo n't be penalized for not buying it .
So what you do then is , you let the political process work . I would get rid of all the features of the law that are making their coverage so expensive . You get rid of community rating . You get rid of all the coverage mandates that are in Obamacare .
I guess what I 'm talking about , if that happens and the Supreme Court rules in our favor , is my preference would be that Congress should repeal the whole thing .
Sarah Kliff : There is an alternate scenario where states decide , `` Okay I want those billions of dollars in subsidies . I 'm going to build an exchange to get them . ''
Michael Cannon : That 's an interesting option , but it 's hard for them to do that . And it ’ s not at all clear that states would want to do that .
Remember , if the Supreme Court rules for the plaintiffs , it will be saying that the president has been violating the law on a massive scale . That 's going to affect the debate over what states should do . `` The president has been violating the law , should we just give him a Mulligan and establish an exchange ? ''
`` Are the subsidies legal or are they not ? '' I 'm convinced that they 're illegal .
Yes , you 're going to have some pressure from insurance companies to establish an exchange because they 're going to want those subsidies . But you ’ ll get even more pressure from opponents of this law than you got before . They 'll know not only was the president breaking the law , but they can block the individual mandate now . You might even get employers opposing an Exchange , saying , `` Wait a second . We do n't want to be subject to the employer mandate when the people in the next state are not . ''
Sarah Kliff : We started open enrollment on Saturday . The White House has said repeatedly , `` Do n't worry about signing up . You 're going to get subsidies . ''
Michael Cannon : Here 's what the White House is asking people to do . They are asking people to sign up for coverage that those people may not be able to afford on their own , with the promise of subsidies that two federal courts so far have ruled are illegal ; that the Supreme Court may take away in the middle of a coverage year ; and that the enrollee may have to pay back to the IRS . The administration is telling people , `` Do n't worry . '' Are they out of their minds ?
Sarah Kliff : Let 's say we get to June and you guys get a positive ruling . Can the government keep giving subsidies to the people that were getting them through this open enrollment ?
Michael Cannon : It depends on what the Supreme Court says . But if the Court rules for the plaintiffs , the Supreme Court will be saying that those subsidies are illegal .
What you 're asking is , `` Can the president hand out money without congressional authorization ? '' Do we even have to ask that question ? Or are you asking , `` What if the president does it anyway ? ''
Sarah Kliff : What do you think of the people who put the blame on you ? There are people who are going to say , if your case wins , `` Why did you guys take away health coverage from millions of people ? ''
Michael Cannon : The first thing I ’ d say in response is , `` If those subsidies are illegal , would you favor or oppose ending them ? '' So far , no one has said they would favor allowing the president to subsidize people illegally .
Then the question becomes , `` Are they legal or are they not ? '' That 's what we 've been debating all this time . I 'm convinced that they 're illegal .
Then I ask , `` If you were convinced the president was doing something illegal , what would you do ? '' Well , this is what I would do . This is what I 'm doing . Any dislocation , any disruption , any harm that is caused by those people losing those subsidies , the responsibility for that falls at the feet of the president himself .