You may have heard that President Obama has finally `` signed up for Obamacare , '' thus participating in the healthcare overhaul that colloquially bears his name . The White House concedes that the move was merely `` symbolic , '' as presidents -- rightly -- have access to top-notch medical care 'round the clock . The whole idea here was for Obama to show solidarity with the millions of people whose families are being impacted by his signature law . Basically , he does n't need the coverage , but he 'll shell out some dollars to formally endorse his own product . Americans may have glanced at headlines like this and envisioned the president taking a timeout from his Hawaiian getaway to plop down at a secure computer and enroll online like everybody else . That mental image would be ... mistaken :
Obama “ was pleased to participate in a plan as a show of support for these marketplaces which are providing quality , affordable health care options to more than a million people , ” the official added . But Obama did not directly sign up for insurance . Rather , his staff went in person to sign him up , an official told POLITICO . “ Like some Americans , the complicated nature of the president ’ s case required an in-person sign-up , ” the official said . “ As you ’ d expect , the president ’ s personal information is not readily available in the variety of government databases HealthCare.gov uses to verify identities . ”
So while Obama was enjoying some rest and relaxation with his family , White House staffers trudged over to the DC exchange and enrolled the president through back channels . The administration spokesperson quoted by Politico notes that obviously Obama would n't plug his personal data into the exchange website because he 's the president . Indeed . He 's also someone who knows exactly how vulnerable his data would be on these sites . His administration has been repeatedly warned about security issues with Obamacare 's websites by outside watchdogs and internal experts , with at least one `` high level '' problem arising just last week . CMS is reporting a wave of web traffic today at Healthcare.gov as procrastinators nationwide attempt to sign up for coverage by the midnight deadline . Yes , the deadline was quietly extended by 24 hours ( in order to obtain coverage by January 1 ) , but that extension only applies to people who are already in a queue by the end of today . Those queues are necessary features because the site has n't been able process more than 60,000 simultaneous users . White House officials are urging people not to wait until tomorrow because , according to WaPo , `` the problem-plagued website may fail and leave uninsured users without coverage at the start of the 2014 . '' The same Post piece says that roughly 900,000 people have now selected plans through Healthcare.gov -- a big improvement over October and November 's paltry numbers . The administration 's total 203/2014 enrollment goal is seven million , with half of the enrollment period already elapsed . Also , how many of those 900k have completed the enrollment process and paid their first month 's premiums ? That 's still anyone 's guess . Stories like this and this and this raise concerns . How many individuals will think they 're already covered , only to discover that they 're not , in the midst of a medical crisis ? I 'll leave you with CNN 's latest polling numbers on Obamacare :
Only 35 % of those questioned in the poll say they support the health care law , a 5-point drop in less than a month . Sixty-two percent say they oppose the law , up four points from November . Nearly all of the newfound opposition is coming from women . “ Opposition to Obamacare rose six points among women , from 54 % in November to 60 % now , while opinion of the new law remained virtually unchanged among men , ” CNN Polling Director Keating Holland said . “ That ’ s bad news for an administration that is reaching out to moms across the country in an effort to make Obamacare a success . ”
Ed Morrissey notes that on the question of costs , only seven percent ( ! ) of respondents said they believe Obamacare will make their coverage more affordable , while nearly two-thirds expect to pay more . That 's a catastrophic result for supporters of the `` Affordable '' Care Act .