NEW YORK ( ███ ) - As Republican and Democratic lawmakers clash over the future of Obamacare , Americans largely are eager for a bipartisan solution to its shortcomings , according to a ███/Ipsos opinion poll released on Thursday .
The Oct. 14-23 poll found that 62 percent of Americans want former President Barack Obama ’ s healthcare law to be maintained , up from 54 percent in a January poll . About half – including 51 percent of Democrats and 56 percent of Republicans – want “ a bipartisan group ” rather than just members of their own parties to improve the healthcare system .
“ It ’ s not enough just to rip up the law , ” said Tim Lukasek , 45 , who has insurance provided by his employer in St. Louis but likes a feature of Obamacare that allows him to cover his young adult children under his insurance policy . Lukasek described himself as more likely to vote Democrat .
“ It should be a bipartisan mix of people hashing this out , and then everyone needs to agree on it , ” he said .
Republican lawmakers have repeatedly tried to repeal the Affordable Care Act since it became law in 2010 , saying it represents government overreach into personal healthcare decisions and drives up prices for consumers .
More than 20 million Americans have obtained medical coverage under Obamacare , and Democrats warn that killing the law would cut many of them off from insurance .
President Donald Trump , who had promised during his 2016 election campaign to repeal and replace Obamacare and has vowed to let the law implode , this month terminated subsidies paid to health insurers that help cover medical expenses for low-income Americans .
Senator Lamar Alexander , a Republican , and Senator Patty Murray , a Democrat , have proposed a short-term fix to restore the subsidies for two years to stabilize the individual insurance markets created by Obamacare until a longer-term replacement can be negotiated .
“ There are a lot of issues , but I think ( the politicians ) should just put their differences aside and think about what ’ s better for everyone else in the country , ” said Kadee Matthew , a veterinary technician who lives outside of Birmingham , Alabama , and identifies as a moderate Republican .
Poll participants were split over who would do a better job at the repairs . Democrats were more likely to say the federal government , while Republicans were more likely to prefer that U.S. states take the lead .
The majority of those surveyed believe the law has been successful at “ expanding health insurance coverage in the U.S. ” Responses were split along party lines , with most Democrats saying it was successful and most Republicans saying it was not .
“ It was working until now , but a lot of rocks are being thrown at it , ” said Catherine Evans , a stay-at-home mom in Silver Spring , Maryland , who said she is more likely to vote Democratic .
She noted Trump ’ s decision to cut off billions of dollars in subsidy payments to insurers . Insurers have raised monthly premium costs for the most popular Obamacare plans by 34 percent , on average , for 2018 , according to an analysis by Avalere Health .
A majority of adults – 56 percent – said they opposed Trump ’ s decision on subsidies , versus 29 percent who supported it .
Evans said she would like to see both political parties work together to stabilize the insurance market , but “ I don ’ t think right now they are capable of that . The way they are behaving is so childish and petty . It ’ s ridiculous . ”
Healthcare experts say that Trump ’ s moves to undermine the law and statements declaring Obamacare as “ dead ” have created confusion among consumers who were planning to enroll , beginning next week , in health coverage for 2018 .
Among the people surveyed by ███/Ipsos , 11 percent said they believed that Obamacare had ended , versus 67 percent who said the program was “ still operating . ”
The ███/Ipsos poll was conducted online in English throughout the United States . Some of the poll questions ran longer than others , gathering between 3,865 and 1,545 responses each .
The poll has a credibility interval , a measure of accuracy , of 3 percentage points for the entire sample , 4 percentage points for responses from Democrats and 5 percentage points for responses from Republicans .