As the administration struggles to put in place the final , complex piece of President Obama ’ s signature health care law , an endeavor on a scale not seen since Medicare ’ s creation nearly a half-century ago , Democrats are worried that major snags will be exploited by Republicans in next year ’ s midterm elections . Many Democrats also want to see a more aggressive and visible president to push the law across the country . This week Mr. Obama is returning to the fray to an extent unseen since he signed the law in 2010 , including a White House event on Friday to promote the law ’ s benefits for women , the first in a series of appearances for health care this year . A number of health insurance changes have already taken place , but this fall , just as the 2014 election season heats up , is the deadline for introducing the law ’ s core feature : the insurance marketplaces , known as exchanges , where millions of uninsured Americans can buy coverage , with subsidies for many .
The noticeable proliferation of `` Democrats fret over Obamacare '' stories in the mainstream media points to something other than a simple manifestation of liberal self-flagellation . These pieces are warnings : Here 's the latest installment from the
Yes , because highly `` visible '' speechifying from the president has been such a boon to this cause in the past . In any case , the introduction of central changes in 2014 puts the lie to the president 's recent assertion that the Obamacare process is already over for up to `` 90 percent '' of Americans . It 's next year 's implementation , which promises to be messy , that continues to stir Democratic jitters :
For the third time , Republicans are trying to make the law perhaps the biggest issue of the elections , and are preparing to exploit every problem that arises . After many unsuccessful efforts to repeal the law , the Republican-led House plans another vote soon . And Republican governors or legislatures in many states are balking at participating , leaving Washington responsible for the marketplaces . Democrats are worried about 2014 — a president ’ s party typically loses seats in midterm years — and some have gone public with concerns about the pace of carrying out the law . Senator Harry Reid of Nevada , the majority leader , told an interviewer last week that he agreed with a recent comment by Senator Max Baucus of Montana , a Democratic architect of the law , who said “ a train wreck ” could occur this fall if preparations fell short . The White House has allayed some worries , with briefings for Democrats about their public education plans , including PowerPoint presentations that show areas with target populations down to the block level . “ There ’ s clearly some concern ” among Democrats “ that their constituents don ’ t yet have all facts on how it will work , and that Republicans are filling that vacuum with partisan talking points , ” said Representative Steve Israel of New York , head of the House Democrats ’ campaign committee . “ And the administration must use every tool they have to get around the obstructions and make it work . ”
Democrats can continue to console themselves with the delusion that their biggest problem stems from public ignorance . In reality , their electoral pain will come from people whounderstand the law and who 've fought it at every turn since 2009 . Demanding more money to sell the law only inflames public concerns over the already-massive cost of the program , and has zero chance of passing Congress anyway . But even if those funds were provided , one can only dress up a failure for so long . The quote above from DCCC chair Steve Israel is particularly amusing . He 's very upset with Republicans for filling the imagined public information void with `` partisan talking points , '' presumably designed to trick people into believing the law is a mess . Damn those Republican operatives who 've called Obamacare implementation a `` huge train wreck , '' likened the roll-out to a `` third world experience `` for the American people , asserted that the `` Affordable '' Care Act does n't actually contain costs , and spread rumors that the law is contributing to -- not reducing -- rising premiums . Oops . Obamacare 's problem is n't Republican talking points , which have proven rather toothless on any number of fronts recently . Obamacare 's problem is Obamacare , which is why the chorus of Democrats publicly voicing concerns is growing louder . I 'll leave you with two reminders : Obamacare is still being written , as evidenced by the growing anti-freedom tower . From today'spiece : `` Essential regulations remain unresolved , leaving insurers , small businesses and health care providers unsure of how to proceed . `` A core element of Obamacare is a huge expansion of Medicaid , an existing program that is already financially unsustainable , has generated increasing access hurdles , and has been demonstrated to be a substantive failure on health outcomes by a comprehensive , nonpartisan study . MIT economist Jon Gruber -- who helped design Obamacare , including the Medicaid expansion -- has now separately concluded that Medicaid does n't work . But let 's swell its rolls by 11 million people anyway .