The Obama administration promised to have the Obamacare website working smoothly by Saturday , but even President Obama knows this latest deadline is another target that his team is likely to miss .
Only about 25,000 Americans were able to enroll on the federal government ’ s HealthCare.gov website in October , when most people instead encountered computer errors . And although Mr. Obama and his top advisers vowed to fix the problems by the end of November , they have retreated from that pledge in favor of a scaled-back promise by Health and Human Service Secretary Kathleen Sebelius that the website will be working for “ most users ” by Saturday ’ s deadline .
This week , administration officials acknowledged they are holding back on a marketing campaign for the program because they don ’ t want too many users to visit the flawed site . And HHS also revealed this week that the Spanish-language version of HealthCare.gov still isn ’ t ready to enroll people ; HHS is postponing that service again until sometime in December .
The administration also Wednesday announced another major delay , putting off by one year the online program that lets small businesses shop for plans through the federal Obamacare marketplace .
The developments are the latest in a series of downsized goals , broken promises and delays for Obamacare since the program became law of the land in 2010 . If there has been a hallmark of Obamacare so far , it has been watching Mr. Obama ’ s optimistic assurances crumble later under the weight of reality .
“ The administration completely oversold what it was going to be , in terms of all dessert and no spinach , ” said Paul Howard , a specialist on health-care policy at the nonprofit Manhattan Institute .
Throughout the president ’ s re-election campaign in 2012 , Mr. Obama trumpeted the signature achievement of his first term and told voters that he was trustworthy above all else .
“ You do want to be able to trust your president , ” Mr. Obama told supporters in Ohio a few days before Election Day . “ You want to know that your president means what he says , and says what he means . And after four years as president , you know me . You know where I stand . You know I tell the truth . ”
Those words stand in stark contrast to Mr. Obama ’ s now-infamous broken pledge , repeatedly made without qualification , that “ if you like your health-insurance plan , you can keep your plan. ” By last month , with more than 3.5 million people being forced out of their old insurance policies by Obamacare , the president admitted that his promise wasn ’ t true for many people .
Behind the scenes , he reportedly berated his staff for allowing him to boast in public that buying health insurance would be as easy as shopping on Amazon.com .
In an interview with Barbara Walters to be broadcast Friday night on ABC ’ s “ 20/20 ” show , Mr. Obama said his team is looking into why he was kept in the dark about the website ’ s problems .
“ We ’ re evaluating why it is exactly that I didn ’ t know soon enough that [ it ] wasn ’ t going to work the way it needed to , ” Mr. Obama said . “ But my priority now has been to just make sure that it works . ”
But even the president ’ s apology was a bit of misdirection . Mr. Obama knew as early as February 2010 , one month before he signed the law , that millions of Americans wouldn ’ t be able to keep their health insurance .
At a health care summit with congressional Republicans at Blair House on Feb. 25 , 2010 , House Majority Leader Eric Cantor , Virginia Republican , who was House minority whip at the time , voiced concern to the president that “ between eight million and nine million people may very well lose the coverage that they have because of the construct of this bill . ”
“ I don ’ t think you can answer the question in the positive to say that people will be able to maintain their coverage , people will be able to see the doctors they want , in the kind of bill that you are proposing , ” Mr. Cantor told Mr. Obama .
The president replied that a relatively small portion of the population would be affected , and they would be better off under Obamacare .
Mr. Obama told Mr. Cantor , “ The eight to nine million people you refer to that might have to change their coverage — keep in mind out of the 300 million Americans that we are talking about — would be folks who the Congressional Budget Office estimates would find the deal in the exchange better . So , yes , they would change coverage because they got more choice and competition . ”
Those promises , Mr. Howard said , “ were papered over ” later with regulations requiring more expensive coverage for many .
“ The administration had to require tight grandfathering of current plans to move people into the exchanges , which means cancellations , ” Mr. Howard said .
Within six months of his second inauguration , Mr. Obama had broken his own law , delaying the crucial employer mandate portion of Obamacare by a full year until 2015 . The administration cited confusion by businesses about how to report employee insurance information to the Internal Revenue Service .
The president told supporters in Southern California this week that he ’ ll never back down from making sure the law works .
“ We are going to continue to implement the health care law , ” Mr. Obama said . “ The product is good . People want it . And we should not live in a country where people are going bankrupt just because they get sick . And anybody who is going to keep on pushing against that , they will meet my resistance , because I am willing to fix any problems that there are , but I ’ m not going to abandon people to make sure that they ’ ve got health insurance in this country . ”
With the faulty website preventing many people from enrolling , health care analysts say the next problem for Obamacare could be the failure to bring young , healthy people into the program . Obamacare needs people who don ’ t require much medical care to still be paying premiums , to offset the costs of older , sicker people who place greater demands on the system .
“ They have assumed wrongly that the plans they ’ re trying to sell through the exchanges are going to be attractive to relatively healthy Americans , ” said James Capretta , a public policy specialist at the right-leaning American Enterprise Institute . “ I just think that ’ s wrong . Lots of people are going to end up not buying those plans . Mainly it ’ s going to be an attractive place for people who have existing health problems . It ’ s going to become essentially a program for relatively less healthy people . ”
Mr. Howard predicted the trend will create more problems for the program , financial and political , in 2014 as congressional mid-term elections near .
“ If the picture doesn ’ t improve in terms of getting these young and healthy people to enroll and it stays skewed , you ’ re looking at a cycle where we ’ re going to have more expensive rate increases for 2015 , ” Mr. Howard said . “ The government can push back [ against insurers ] and say the rates need to be lower , but the insurers can say ‘ We ’ ll walk. ’ That ’ s the real tension here . ”
As this happens , the premiums for everybody in the system then have to increase , which makes buying insurance an even less rational act for a healthy person , which means even fewer will sign up , and on and on — a phenomenon analysts of insurance markets refer to as the “ death spiral . ”
“ The expectation was that there would be a big pool of really healthy people offsetting a relatively smaller pool of more expensive patients . If that doesn ’ t play out , then the exchanges are looking at a problem in terms of affordability , a very serious problem , ” Mr. Howard said .
While the Obama administration is saying the website is getting better , the problems might also be preventing younger , healthier consumers from finding out how truly expensive their coverage would be .
“ Right now , people haven ’ t been able to really shop effectively , ” Mr. Howard said . “ A lot of these plans are going to be very narrow networks and come with high deductibles . Except for a few states you can purchase a plan and not really understand what kind of physician and hospital coverage you ’ re going to get . And then I would expect lots of stories to start popping up after January when people start to use the coverage and hearing complaints that they can ’ t see the doctor they want . ”
Administration officials say the website should be able to handle 50,000 users simultaneously by Friday , citing steady improvement in the speed of the site . By last week , the average load time for the website ’ s pages was less than one second , down from October ’ s time of eight seconds , according to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services .
Jeffrey Zients , who was tapped by Mr. Obama to troubleshoot the problems with the website , has warned that Saturday ’ s deadline will not be “ a magic moment ” for the site . Instead , he said it will continue to make steady improvement .