There ’ s an old joke from the Soviet Union that could help describe the current state of affairs on the GOP ’ s health care bill .
Soviet leaders Josef Stalin , Nikita Khrushchev and Leonid Brezhnev are aboard a train in Siberia . The train breaks down . Passengers ask Stalin what to do . Stalin executes the crew , hires a relief crew and gets the train going again . The train stalls again . This time , it ’ s up to Khrushchev . Khrushchev fires the train crew but pardons them . Khrushchev then brings in yet another crew to restart the train . The train breaks down a third time . So everyone turns to Brezhnev . His solution ? “ Pull down the window shades and pretend we ’ re moving . ”
Are Republicans getting anywhere ? Or are they pretending they ’ re moving ?
The problem is that the House Republican health care bill suffers from pre-existing conditions . It harbors too many maladies to pass through the marble risk corridors of Capitol Hill .
The package doesn ’ t lower costs enough , increase coverage , provide better care and save the federal government money . Otherwise , a minimum of 216 Republicans ( the threshold necessary to pass legislation with 431 current House members ) would vote yea and the plan would sail through . But this patient is now on life support .
We ’ ve heard bromides from House Republicans and White House officials for weeks that the GOP is on the verge of advancing a retrenched health care bill . Senior White House officials suggested to ███ a vote would come Wednesday . Sources indicated the House was only “ five or six votes ” shy of muscling the plan to passage .
“ We ’ re making progress , ” said House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis. “ The president has been nothing but helpful on health care . ”
“ I like the direction we ’ re heading , ” said House Majority Whip Steve Scalise , R-La .
“ That is a great question , ” opined a senior GOP leadership aide .
The Republican leadership squad skated out of a morning press conference without saying when they could vote . ███ buttonholed Scalise about where the whip count stood .
But if they had the votes , they ’ d pull the trigger . And Republicans were bleeding votes .
GOP congressional sources expressed concern about White House predictions of when the House may vote . They were exasperated with administration officials who leaked what is supposedly the vote tally .
“ You don ’ t announce a whip count . You just don ’ t , ” said a source .
The whip count is an extremely closely held figure . In many instances , just the whip along with a few key staffers and certain members actually know the true number . Several sources on Capitol Hill openly contested that the vote count was as close as administration figures let on .
“ They just don ’ t know , ” said one congressional source of the White House .
Republican leadership sources point out that they need more than a margin of one vote to win . They need several . No one wants to portray a given lawmaker as the one who cast the “ deciding vote ” to repeal and replace ObamaCare . You always need a cushion of a few votes . In addition , the leadership needs a couple of “ in case emergency , break glass ” votes , too . Such members would stand by during the vote and not cast a ballot . If Republicans have the votes to pass the bill , the whip would “ release ” these members to vote their conscience . If they ’ re short , the whip would ask those members to vote yea to lug the plan across the finish line .
Tracking undecided members could be an even more intriguing enterprise now than watching those who are noes . Lots of undecideds are moderate Republicans who represent battleground districts . A vote for the bill could make them vulnerable in the 2018 midterm elections , imperiling the Republican majority . Many of these Republicans don ’ t want to weigh-in at all . If the leadership calls the vote , they ’ re on the record , one way or the other . They secretly hope the GOP never schedules a vote . That way , they don ’ t have to declare their position .
GOP leaders are relentless in their pursuit . Perhaps fear of a second , brutal defeat clouds their judgment as they optimistically predict that success is just a handful of votes away . Health care was supposed to be the easiest venture of the year . Congress faces daunting challenges ahead to reform the tax code and raise the debt ceiling .
However , Ryan should find solace in one realm . The speaker may not have to fight to keep the government operating in September . The president tweeted about the merits of a shutdown Tuesday morning .
Everything is barreling toward Thursday , a make-or-break day for the bill . House Republicans already scheduled a members-only conference Thursday morning .
Could they vote even if they ’ re not sure of the outcome ?
Certainly . But as they say in the movies , “ You play a dangerous game , Mr. Bond . ”
Pray tell , what does a bill that increases sanctions again North Korea have to do with health care ? Everything . The House debated the widely bipartisan measure Tuesday . But no vote is likely until Thursday . Why ? A vote on this measure could serve one of several purposes . First , it gives Republicans a major vote on a big issue right before a recess if they never try on health care . Republicans could also use the North Korea bill as a “ bedcheck ” vote . Almost everyone one on both sides of the aisle wants to vote to get tough with North Korea . Attendance for that vote would be high . As such , the GOP gets a good snapshot of precisely how many members are present from both sides of the aisle . That helps leaders predict how many votes they need to pass the health care package .
At the House Rules Committee Tuesday afternoon , Rep. Jim McGover , D-Mass. , again pressed Chairman Pete Sessions , R-Texas , if they would vote this week .
“ I have no clue what we are going to do , ” replied Sessions .
Capitol Attitude is a weekly column written by members of the ███ Capitol Hill team . Their articles take you inside the halls of Congress , and cover the spectrum of policy issues being introduced , debated and voted on there .