His party 's political fortunes and his own legacy on the line , President Obama launched a campaign on Tuesday to once again sell the benefits of ObamaCare to the public , and try to head off a backlash in 2014 .
The president , speaking at a White House event flanked by supporters of the law , declared that the Affordable Care Act `` is working '' and that the flawed website will improve `` over time . ''
`` Tell your friends , tell your family -- do not let the initial problems with the website discourage you , '' Obama said .
But Republican leaders blasted the `` campaign-style '' push as doing little to address the widespread problems facing consumers .
`` It 's not just a broken website , this bill is fundamentally flawed -- causing people to lose the doctor of their choice , causing them to lose their health plan . And if that is n't enough , they 're having to pay much higher prices at the same time , '' House Speaker John Boehner said .
Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell said the law is `` broken beyond repair , '' and said repeal , followed by a new bill , is the best `` fix . ''
Obama vowed that the law would not be repealed `` as long as I 'm president . ''
Republicans already are threatening to tar the Democratic Party with the health care law 's troubled rollout . Obama , meanwhile , is in danger of becoming what Nancy Pelosi was in 2010 -- a party leader whom endangered Democrats in state and congressional races will run from , not with , in the midterms .
As former Pennsylvania Gov . Ed Rendell told Politico : `` If it were right now , I do n't know that any Democrat running for governor would like the president involved . '' A host of recent polls have shown Obama 's approval ratings hitting record lows .
But the White House is trying to turn the debate around , after weeks of withering and widespread criticism over HealthCare.gov 's technical problems and insurance policy cancellations .
After the White House event on Tuesday , the administration plans to spend the next several weeks drawing attention to the benefits of the law .
The president will also take aim at Republican-led efforts to repeal ObamaCare , arguing the GOP is trying to strip away benefits provided under the law without presenting an alternative proposal , one official said .
`` Healthcare.gov met our self-imposed November 30th deadline and even as we continue to make improvements to the website , we 'll also remind the public about how the Affordable Care Act is already making a positive difference in the lives of millions of Americans today , '' White House spokesman Josh Earnest said in a statement .
The campaign is aimed at making sure Americans do n't shy away from the massive health care program which needs their support in order to thrive .
But the president also needs to change the dynamic in order to assure skittish Democrats that the law is something they can run on in 2014 .
Some of the most heated criticism over the past two months has come from Democrats , who lambasted the HealthCare.gov problems and in some cases pushed legislation to delay key elements of the law .
Obama administration officials acknowledged HealthCare.gov is still a work in progress after a key deadline to fix the problems with the online health exchange . The administration had promised a vastly improved shopping experience on the website by the end of November .
The site appeared to generally run smoothly early Monday morning before glitches began slowing people down . By 10 a.m. , federal health officials deployed a new queue system that stalls new visitors on a waiting page so that those further along in the process can finish their application with fewer problems .
About 750,000 had visited the site by Monday night - about double the traffic for a typical Monday , according to figures from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services .
The first big test of the repaired website probably wo n't come for another couple of weeks , when an enrollment surge is expected as consumers rush to meet a Dec. 23 deadline so their coverage can kick in on the first of the year .
Avoiding a break in coverage is particularly important for millions of people whose current individual policies were canceled because they do n't meet the standards of the health care law , as well as for a group of about 100,000 in an expiring federal program for high-risk patients .
With the midterm elections less than a year away , it 's vital to Democrats that the site lives up to expectations the president set . Republicans have already suggested they 'll launch coordinated attacks linking every congressional Democrat up for re-election to the Affordable Care Act .
`` President Obama and his administration repeatedly claimed the ObamaCare website would be fully functioning by the end of November , but this has proven to be just another broken promise , '' RNC Chairman Reince Priebus said Monday . `` The Obama administration had over three years to build Healthcare.gov , and all they 've produced is a non-functioning website , wasting hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars . ''
Federal health officials have acknowledged the importance of fixing back-end problems as insurers struggle to process applications because of incomplete or inaccurate data . Even when consumers think they 've gone through the whole process , their information may not get to the insurer without problems .
`` We do know that things are not perfect with the site . We will continue to make improvements and upgrades , '' said Julie Bataille , communications director for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services .