The White House acknowledged for the first time Monday that President Obama ’ s oft-repeated promise that everyone can keep their health insurance plans under Obamacare just isn ’ t true .
For more than three years as he worked for enactment of the Affordable Care Act and encouraged people to enroll , Mr. Obama routinely pledged that people could keep their doctors and their plans if they liked them .
“ If you like your health care plan , you will be able to keep your health care plan . Period , ” Mr. Obama said in June 2009 . Later that year , he proclaimed , “ Nothing in our plan requires you to change what you have . ”
With thousands of people across the country receiving cancellation notices from their insurers , the White House acknowledged Monday that some consumers will be required to switch plans , which could mean switching doctors . White House press secretary Jay Carney said it ’ s because the health care law requires certain standards of coverage .
“ It ’ s true there are existing health care plans on the individual market that do not meet those minimum standards and therefore do not qualify for the Affordable Care Act , ” Mr. Carney said .
Former presidential adviser David Axelrod said Monday on MSNBC that most people who have insurance can keep their plans , and those who lose their plans will be “ transferred to higher-quality plans with subsidies . ”
But many middle-class families are finding out that they will be required to pay higher premiums for new plans and that they don ’ t qualify for subsidies .
Dianne Barrette , 56 , of Florida , recently learned that her health care plan was not comprehensive enough to meet coverage requirements set by the Affordable Care Act . She was informed that her plan will cost 10 times more than her current premium of $ 50 per month .
“ What I have right now is what I ’ m happy with , ” she told CBS News . “ I just want to know why I can ’ t keep what I have . ”
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell , Kentucky Republican , said it ’ s more proof Obamacare isn ’ t working .
“ For months , the American people have been learning about the impact Obamacare will have on individuals and families in the form of higher premiums , canceled insurance plans , and lost jobs — more broken promises from the administration , ” Mr. McConnell said . “ Obamacare costs too much and it ’ s not working the way they promised . Obamacare ’ s problems run much deeper than the failed website , and it ’ s time for the president to keep his word . ”
The latest Obamacare controversy erupted as Mr. Obama prepares to fly to Boston on Wednesday to give a speech promoting the benefits of the program . The White House timed the president ’ s event for the same day that Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius is expected to receive a grilling from congressional Republicans at a hearing on the early failures of the healthcare.gov website .
White House aides said more than 80 percent of Americans won ’ t be required to change health insurers , either because they get coverage through their employers or they are covered by Medicare or Medicaid .
Asked by a reporter about a family in North Carolina that discovered their premiums will rise 430 percent , Mr. Carney said he could not address individual complaints . But he said “ bare-bones ” insurance policies were “ part of the problem . ”
“ It is not a fair comparison to compare those kinds of plans , which were part of the problem , to the basic level insurance that ’ s provided under the Affordable Care Act , ” Mr. Carney said.Valerie Jarrett went to Twitter on Monday night to take a different tack , blaming the insurance companies .
“ FACT : Nothing in # Obamacare forces people out of their health plans . No change is required unless insurance companies change existing plans , ” the White House senior adviser wrote .