When SouthWest Urology first opened its doors in 1982 , the two founders , fresh out of their residency programs , weren ’ t concerned with medical coding , reimbursements , or regulations .
The truth is , they didn ’ t give much thought to the government ’ s intrusion into health care or the economic aspects of their new venture . The business in those days took care of itself , and physicians were free to spend 100 percent of their time focused on patients .
Now , after more than 30 years in practice , the Ohio-based group tells ███ that their main concern is whether or not they can survive the corporatization of health care delivery , the cannibalization of care by large hospital systems , and the changes that are coming with Obamacare .
Private practice physicians across the country share similar concerns , which is why many doctors are retiring early , leaving the headaches behind to go work for a hospital system , or are quitting medicine altogether . But not every physician is giving up on independent medicine , of course , and neither is the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons , a group that , according to its website , is dedicated to “ preserving the sanctity of the patient- physician relationship and the practice of private medicine . ”
While efforts to usher in some form of socialized medicine in the United States date back nearly a century , it was the Wagner-Murray-Dingell Bill of the 1940s that was the impetus for AAPS ’ founding . The proposal called for national health insurance and was a precursor to what we have now , Dr. Jane Orient , executive director of AAPS , tells ███ . “ AAPS was founded because the founding members felt that the AMA ( American Medical Association ) was not fighting against this . ”
The group ’ s motto , “ omnia pro aegroto ” translates to “ all for the patient , ” and that ’ s exactly what they ’ ve been committed to for the past 70 years .
“ We fight for limiting or removing government ’ s intrusion into medicine , ” Orient says . “ We provide seminars helping our members learn how to get out of third-party contracts and how to opt out of Medicare and serve their patients directly , just like most of us did before 1965 , when medicine was a whole lot less expensive and a whole lot more directed toward what patients need . ”
And when the medical profession is threatened , the group does more than just gripe—they take action . In 1994 , AAPS temporarily stopped Hillarycare by suing over the task force ’ s secret operations . And more recently , they put the Texas Medical Board on trial in federal court for abusing its power . While closing arguments were in February and a written decision is still pending , the trial nevertheless “ sent a strong message of reform and accountability ” to state medical boards across the nation , AAPS ’ website explains .
“ We ’ ve got a lot of lawsuits pending and a lot of amicus briefs have been filed , some of them are directed at Obamacare , and even though they ’ ve not gotten much publicity , they really do have the possibility of voiding the whole act , ” Orient says . “ I think the most important thing we do is out beyond the Beltway , out in real America , in providing an option to total centralization of medicine and the abolishment of the patient-physician relationship . ”
Although our nation is inching closer to socialized medicine , Orient is still hopeful that the trend can be reversed , but says it won ’ t happen immediately .
“ I think we have a trickle of movement in the opposite direction . It could become a flood at some point as patients realize that it is of some value to them to have a physician who cares about them and is working for them instead of someone who ’ s punching a clock and serving the bottom line of a hospital , or a third-party payer , ” she says , adding that physicians are also learning that they can not only escape from these shackles , but can also make a living , work less , and pay less overhead by going back to the old-fashioned way .
But if the trend toward universal , government-funded health care con- tinues apace , Orient believes the future of health care in America will look very much like the Department of Veterans Affairs .
“ We ’ ll see waiting lines , we ’ ll see rationing , we ’ ll see more patients being shuttled off to hospice when back in the old days , which was not very long ago , they could have survived with reasonable treatment , ” she says .
One thing about the future of health care is certain , however : AAPS will never waver in its support for ethical medicine that puts the interests of patients first . •