On the heels of Tuesday 's report that Obamacare 's employer mandate would be delayed by a year , the Obama Administration delayed income-verification requirements for health exchange subsidies . This is another piece of the unraveling that has continued to take place even as the Obama administration has pressed forward with implementation .
The verification systems are meant to determine who qualifies for new benefits under the Affordable Care Act . The law includes tax subsidies to purchase health insurance for Americans who earn less than 400 percent of the poverty line , about $ 45,000 for an individual . After encountering “ legislative and operational barriers , ” the federal government will not require the District and the 16 states that are running their own marketplaces to verify a consumer ’ s statement that they do not receive health insurance from their employer ... The rule also scaled back states ’ responsibilities to double-check the income levels that consumers report , which determine any tax subsidy they receive .
Avik Roy writes that this is an example of President Obama 's attitude of `` subsidize first , ask questions later , '' and that it 's a predictable consequence of the Obama administration being completely unprepared for the bureaucratic nightmare that is Obamacare :
According to the law , you aren ’ t eligible for Obamacare ’ s subsidies if your employer has offered you what the government considers “ affordable ” coverage . But if employers are no longer going to report whether or not they ’ ve offered “ affordable ” coverage , how can the government verify whether or not workers are eligible for subsidies ? Now we know the answer . The government is going with what Kliff and Somashekhar call “ the honor system. ” “ We have concluded that the…proposed rule is not feasible for implementation for the first year of operations , ” say the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services . The feds will also allow people to gain means-tested subsidized coverage on the exchanges without having to…test their means .
There have not been any penalties outlined for people who lie to the government in order to receive insurance subsidies , but there 's surely a small contingent of people who are put off by lying to the government in general . Nonetheless , considering fraud runs rampant through other government health programs , it 's safe to say that we can expect that to be the case here as well .
Roy also points to his colleague , who has suggested that the entirety of Obamacare be delayed by a year . At the rate that implementation is going , that may very well be the case . Obamacare is the law of the land , but it 's still troubling that the Obama administration has decided it can selectively determine when certain parts of the law will actually affect Americans .