Still , extended problems would almost certainly provide ammunition to conservative lawmakers and others who argue that the size and scope of government should be reduced .
“ Is this a P.R . disaster that fits right into the ‘ government is broken ’ message ? I ’ m afraid that ’ s probably true , ” said Jared Bernstein , the former chief economist to Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr . But , he added , “ If this works well a few months from now , we ’ ll probably be fine . ”
The president is said to be immensely frustrated with the rollout of what is a central part of his most important domestic policy . A stickler for detail and discipline , Mr. Obama has directed his senior White House staff to take charge of a vigorous effort to correct the problem , and to provide him detailed updates every evening .
But he may be too late to contain the damage , at least in the short term .
Yuval Levin , the editor of National Affairs magazine and a conservative opponent of the health law , said the government ’ s inability to get the Web site working raises broader questions about how well the rest of the health care law will be implemented in the next several years .
“ The promise of the administrative state becomes harder to believe in when it fails in practice , ” Mr. Levin said . He added that it was easy to overstate the impact of a Web site that would get fixed eventually . But he said that “ there ’ s a sense that in trying to do too much , the government creates questions about whether it can do anything at all . ”
For Mr. Obama , the answer to that question has always been an enthusiastic yes . In the 2008 campaign , he said he believed “ that part of my job is to make government cool again. ” His campaign sometimes talked about creating an “ iPod government ” that is user-friendly and efficient .
And when it came time to write his State of the Union addresses as president , aides said , Mr. Obama routinely reinstated language about making government more efficient after speechwriters had taken it out , deeming it boring . In his 2011 address , Mr. Obama said : “ We shouldn ’ t just give our people a government that ’ s more affordable . We should give them a government that ’ s more competent and more efficient . We can ’ t win the future with a government of the past . ”