House Republicans say their goal is to repeal President Obama 's health care law , not to present an alternative plan .
`` I do n't think it 's a matter of what we put on the floor right now , '' said Rep. Greg Walden of Oregon , who heads the party 's campaign committee . He added that what is important is `` trying to delay Obamacare . ''
His remarks are in response to criticism that the Republican-led House have voted more than three dozen times over the past several years to repeal the law in part or in whole .
On the larger question about the recent success of Congress , House Speaker John Boehner said Sunday it `` ought to be judged on how many laws we repeal '' not `` by how many new laws we create . ''
Boehner told CBS ' `` Face the Nation '' the United States has `` more laws than the administration could ever enforce . ''
Officially , the Republican effort to craft an alternative health care plan is a work `` in progress '' and has been since Jan. 19 , 2011 , according to GOP.gov , a leadership-run website .
But internal divisions , disagreement about political tactics and Obama 's 2012 re-election have resulted in uncertainty about whether Republicans will vote on a plan of their own before the 2014 elections , or if not by then , perhaps before the president leaves office , more than six years after the original promise .
Rep. Fred Upton of Michigan , who leads a committee with jurisdiction over health care , said , `` If we are successful in ultimately repealing this legislation , then yes , we will have a replacement bill ready to come back with . ''
Divisions were evident earlier this year , when legislation to make it easier for high-risk individuals to purchase coverage died without a vote . It was sidetracked after conservatives , many of them elected with tea party support , objected to any attempt to improve the current law rather than scuttle it .
With the rank and file growing more conservative , some Republicans acknowledge that without changes , they likely could n't pass the alternative measure they backed when Democrats won approval for Obama 's bill in 2010 . Among other provisions , it encouraged employers to sign up their workers for health insurance automatically , so that employees would have to `` opt out '' of coverage if they did n't want it , and provided federal money for state-run high-risk pools for individuals and for reinsurance in the small group market .
The current state of intentions contrasts sharply with the Pledge to America , the manifesto that Republicans campaigned on in 2010 when they took power away from the Democrats . That included a plan to `` repeal and replace '' what it termed a government takeover of health care .
It promised `` common-sense solutions focused on lowering costs and protecting American jobs , '' including steps to overhaul medical malpractice laws and permit the sale of insurance across state lines . Republicans said they would `` empower small businesses with greater purchasing power and create new incentives to save for future health care needs . '' They promised to `` protect the doctor-patient relationship , and ensure that those with pre-existing conditions gain access to the coverage they need . ''
But Rep. Paul Broun , R-Ga. , said , `` We never did see a repeal and replace bill last time , '' referring to the 2011-2012 two-year term that followed the Republican landslide . `` I hope we can this time , and I 'll keep fighting for it . ''
Broun , running for the Senate from Georgia in 2014 as a conservatives ' conservative , has drafted legislation of his own that relies on a series of tax breaks and regulatory changes such as permitting insurance companies to sell coverage across state lines to expand access to health care .
Other Republicans are at work on different bills , in the House Energy and Commerce Committee headed by Upton , and elsewhere .
Rep. Steven Scalise of Louisiana , who leads the conservative Republican Study Conference , said the organization is working on legislation to reduce health care costs `` without the mandates and the taxes '' in the current law .
Like others involved with the issue , he provided no timetable and few specifics .
At the same time , the other half of the 2010 pledge to `` repeal and replace '' is getting a workout .
The House voted last week to delay two requirements , the 38th and 39th time they have gone on record in favor of repealing , reducing or otherwise neutering the system that bears Obama 's name .
In the case of one of the rules , a requirement for businesses to provide insurance to their workers , the administration announced a one-year delay earlier this month .
Democrats and even some Republicans say the intense focus on repealing the health law is wide of the mark .
`` Every voter knows what Republicans are against . They do n't know what they 're for '' on health care , said Rep. Steve Israel of New York , who heads House Democrats ' campaign committee . He said the strategy would haunt Republicans next year among moderate and independent voters who want changes , not outright repeal .
The fate of legislation to put more funds into high-risk pools demonstrated a belief among some Republicans that they should advance alternatives . Polling presentations make the same point but are not uniformly persuasive among the rank and file , according to officials , and lawmakers ' speeches sometimes make it sound as if the health law is disintegrating on its own .
Yet one prominent conservative , Ramesh Ponnuru , warned recently that it was a `` perverse complacency '' to do nothing while assuming the health law will implode .
`` We can be sure that the Left would respond to any such collapse by making the case for a ` single payer ' program in which the federal government directly provides everyone insurance , '' he wrote May 30 in National Review Online .
Ponnuru added that in some Republican circles , `` the idea that an alternative is necessary is seen as a mark of wimpiness , a weakness for big-government programs that are just slightly '' weaker than what Democrats possess .