Bernie Sanders has a health care plan he calls Medicare for all . He 's underselling it . His proposal really should be called Medicare for all and a pony . It 's everything you could want and then some .
Medicare is a giant government program that pays for health care for seniors and the disabled . Its costs are mushrooming . Over the next 10 years , outlays are expected to grow by nearly a third as a share of the economy ; over the next 30 years , those costs are expected to double .
Revenues , however , will lag . The Medicare trust fund is on pace to run out of money by 2029 .
It 's not clear that we as a country can afford Medicare as it currently exists . Merely preserving it without significant cuts would eventually require a tax increase that working people would resent . But instead of looking for ways to economize , the Vermont senator wants to expand the program in a way that the term `` vast '' barely begins to capture .
His majestic vision goes beyond merely including the entire U.S. population in Medicare—which would increase the number of recipients by sixfold in just four years . Sanders wants to add coverage for dental , vision and hearing needs , which the program now excludes . And he promises `` no more copays , no more deductibles and no more fighting with insurance companies when they fail to pay for charges . ''
He 's talking about a huge change . As a study by the Kaiser Family Foundation noted , `` Medicare has relatively high cost-sharing requirements for covered benefits and , unlike typical large employer plans , traditional Medicare does not limit beneficiaries ' annual out-of-pocket spending . '' In 2010 , it found , the average recipient paid $ 2,746 for deductibles , coinsurance and the like ( not counting premiums ) .
Under Sanders ' proposal , the government would pay all those expenses—not for 55 million people but for 325 million . Actually , it would pay all those expenses plus a lot of new ones , because relieving patients of any financial obligation would induce more people to get more care . If you reduce the price of a good to zero , the demand for it will rise—usually by a lot .
American advocates of single-payer health insurance love the Canadian system . But Sanders apparently finds it wanting . His plan would provide even more benefits than Canada 's .
Democrats recently saved their Obamacare from the certain death it faced a few months earlier . The Affordable Care Act , once unpopular , gained broad support because Americans came to see it for what it is : an incremental and fiscally restrained method of expanding the number of people with decent coverage with minimal disruption .
The failed Republican effort to repeal and replace it holds useful lessons . One is the importance of caution . Americans distrust any ambitious change in the realm of medical care . They fear being deprived of something they have and value , and they stand ready to punish the culprits .
Another is the danger of overpromising . Republicans in Congress led us to believe they could deliver lower premiums with no individual mandate and without reducing the number of people covered . When it became clear they could n't deliver , public opinion rebelled . Slogans are easy , but when it comes to health insurance , substance is hard—very hard .
Democrats have an understandable attraction to a single-payer health care system . It 's conceptually simple ; it 's universal ; and it builds on a program that is popular with those it covers . But all this is a siren call that would lead them straight to the rocks .
Americans might love what Sanders offers in the way of more benefits for more people . What they would hate is paying for it . One notable shortcoming of the plan he unveiled is that it has no price tag .
Would you like a fabulous meal ? Of course . Would you order it without knowing what it costs ? No .
The upshot of the ACA 's survival is that Democrats are free to take credit for its benefits while blaming President Donald Trump and Congress for its shortcomings . They can press for small improvements at no political risk . If they decide to embrace Medicare for all , though , they may win votes in the short run while inviting failure in the long run .
What we should have learned from the health insurance debates of the past 25 years is that good politics often makes for bad policy . And bad policy , ultimately , is bad politics .