It 's no surprise to most people at this point that ObamaCare is a total trainwreck but apparently , it 's so bad that both Republicans and Democrats working on Capitol Hill are trying to get themselves a waiver while the rest of the country scrambles to comply . Unreal :
Congressional leaders in both parties are engaged in high-level , confidential talks about exempting lawmakers and Capitol Hill aides from the insurance exchanges they are mandated to join as part of President Barack Obama ’ s health care overhaul , sources in both parties said .
The talks — which involve Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ( D-Nev. ) , House Speaker John Boehner ( R-Ohio ) , the Obama administration and other top lawmakers — are extraordinarily sensitive , with both sides acutely aware of the potential for political fallout from giving carve-outs from the hugely controversial law to 535 lawmakers and thousands of their aides . Discussions have stretched out for months , sources said .
A source close to the talks says : “ Everyone has to hold hands on this and jump , or nothing is going to get done . ”
Yet if Capitol Hill leaders move forward with the plan , they risk being dubbed hypocrites by their political rivals and the American public . By removing themselves from a key Obamacare component , lawmakers and aides would be held to a different standard than the people who put them in office .
Let 's not forget about the historic 2010 overturn of the House when the main issue was ObamaCare . You can bet that if both parties go through with this move , Republicans can expect to be primaried while Democrats can kiss their seats goodbye .... again . Not to mention , if both parties see the law as this big of a disaster , they should all vote to repeal it rather than exempting themselves while the rest of the country suffers .
As I 've written before , the best we can hope for is that ObamaCare collapses on itself as states refuse to implement ObamaCare exchanges , small businesses lay off workers and cut hours to avoid it and as health insurance costs skyrocket as a result of government overreach into the health insurance system .