Two years ago , if you had asked me about the prospects for a single payer health care system to be adopted in the United States , I would have said that there was essentially no chance in the foreseeable future . Single payer would be too expensive and too disruptive to both patients and providers . Even if you could cobble together a semi-functional legislative plan , the politics would never work . Short of catastrophe , there was no way it would ever happen .
But since the 2016 election , I have become slightly less confident in my assessment . I still think single payer in America is quite unlikely . Yet the possibility now strikes me as a little higher — if not in the near term , then a decade or three into the future . And the odds that some sort of hybrid quasi-single-payer system that significantly expands the role of government in the financing or provision of health care have increased even more .
The ███ why I 've changed my thinking is that over the last year or so Democrats and progressive activists have found a new energy in trying to make it happen . During the Democratic primary campaign , Bernie Sanders backed single payer to great effect , and has spent the summer working on a Medicare-for-all bill . Public support for single payer is rising this year . One new poll this month found that a majority of doctors are in favor .
Single payer supporters do n't yet have a workable plan . But they do have a goal . And that goal means that liberals are starting to grapple with the very issues that I always believed would prevent it from happening . Those who oppose greater government intervention in the health care sector should take this as a wake up call .
As it turns out , drawing up and passing a single payer health care plan is n't easy . State based single-payer plans in Vermont , New York , Colorado , and California have struggled to get off the ground , simply because they would be so expensive to run . As ███ 's Eric Boehm has written , many estimates find that these programs would cost as much as states are already spending for their entire annual budgets . And those are the estimates from supporters : Less favorable projections suggest that these programs could cost far , far more . Financing these sorts of programs would thus require tax hikes so large that even liberal states have balked .
But serious single-payer supporters are pointing out other problems too : Earlier this month in The Nation , Joshua Holland argued that plans based on the idea of expanding Medicare , the federal health care program for seniors , to the entire population would face nearly insurmountable obstacles . For one thing , Medicare pays doctors and other health care providers far lower rates than private insurance . As Olga Khazan writes in The Atlantic in a separate article on the challenges and drawbacks of single payer , some doctors would inevitably refuse to participate . And the rates are low enough that many hospitals simply could n't survive if all services were billed at the typical payment rates for government programs . Those who liked their doctors would not necessarily be able to keep their doctors .
Indeed , it 's difficult to overstate just how disruptive a transition to a full-fledged single payer system would be : Under the most sweeping plans , every single person who currently gets private insurance through their employer or through the individual market would be thrust into an entirely new government-run plan . Every single health care provider in the United States that does business with private insurers would have to completely reorganize their billing and financing structures . Every person who works for a private health insurance company would be be out of a job — or would have to go work for the government , either as a contractor or an employee .
It 's hard to imagine a transition of this magnitude like this going smoothly ; the rocky rollout of Obamacare 's online health insurance exchanges — a much smaller event — is instructive . The technical and administrative challenges of designing and implementing a nationwide single payer system would be far greater .
Like I said , single-payer advocates do n't have a workable plan . And the more technocratic amongst them are starting to realize it . Holland 's article is framed as an argument that universal coverage need to take the political and policy challenges seriously , and work through the details .
You can already see this happening . Holland gives space to the idea of `` Medicare for More , '' which would allow more people to buy into the federally run program , creating a more gradual transition in which individuals were allowed to opt into a new system , rather than forced out of their current plans . Allowing people to buy into existing government health care programs is n't an entirely new idea , but it is one that seems to be gaining traction .
Nevada 's legislature recently passed a bill to allow state residents to buy into its Medicaid program ; the plan was vetoed at the last moment by Republican Gov . Brian Sandoval . But even Sandoval appeared to encourage more exploration of the idea , saying that his veto `` does not end the conversation about potential coverage gaps or possible solutions , including Medicaid-like solutions . ''
This week , meanwhile , Sen. Brian Schatz , a Democrat representing the state of Hawaii , said he would soon propose a plan to allow individuals to buy into Medicaid through Obamacare 's exchanges , using the law 's federal subsidies toward their premiums .
The buy-ins have problems too — most notably that no one has really laid out in detail exactly how they would be priced and administered . As a jointly run federal-state program with lots of state-by-state variation , Medicaid is more like 50 separate programs than one uniform benefit . The proposals so far have not resolved basic questions about benefit design or how premiums would be set . Nevada 's bill was just four pages long . It was n't really a plan so much as a declaration that the state should start coming up with a plan .
But that is exactly why I have changed my mind about the possibility of single-payer , or something that moves us closer to it . No , there 's no plan yet . But health care advocates and policy experts on the left have settled on a goal , and are now expending effort on trying to come up with ways to achieve it , or at least move in that direction . The end result might not be a fully socialized health care system . But it could produce something much closer to it than we have today .
This is similar to what happened after the failure of the planned health care overhaul under President Clinton in the early 1990s . Democrats and their allies regrouped , and looked for alternative mechanisms to move towards universal coverage guaranteed by the government . Although it took almost two decades for liberal wonks , activists , and politicians to come together , it eventually paid off in the form of Obamacare .
Republicans , in contrast , have no idea where they stand on health care , or what they really want . Republicans , after all , gave us RomneyCare in Massachusetts , the plan that served as the model for Obamacare , and then spent seven years opposing the law after Democrats adopted the Massachusetts model as their own . The party 's lack of a unified goal is , if anything , even more apparent now than it was during the Obama years , when at least the party was united against Obamacare .
Following the collapse of the GOP health care bill last month — the least popular major legislation in decades — governor John Kasich ( R-Ohio ) and DemocrJohn Hickenloper ( D-Colorado ) are putting together an Obamacare rescue plan . The Trump administration is continuing to pay illegal subsidies to insurers , on a month to month basis , even while threatening to cut them off . Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , who is arguably the party 's legislative strategist , admitted . this week that he did n't have a clear plan . `` On the effort to make dramatic changes on Obamacare , the way forward is somewhat murky , '' he said .
For much of the public , then , the national health care debate looks like an argument between two sides , one of which is proposing an ambitious and increasingly popular goal it has n't figured out how to make work yet , the other of which is proposing something , well , murky . That 's not an argument that Republicans are likely to win .
In the very short term , neither single payer nor its more gradual variants have much of a chance , so it may be tempting to dismiss them as possibilities . But in the longer term , Republicans and other critics of government-run health care will need to figure out how work towards clear goals of their own . And they will need to take the advice that liberals are now giving their allies , and start sweating the details .
They will need , in other words , to take both the policy and politics seriously . In this , they will start from behind , because liberals already are .
* Correction : This piece originally named Brian Sandoval as the senator from Hawaii introducing the Medicaid buy-in plan , rather than Brian Schatz . Apologies for the error .