Representative Carolyn B. Maloney , Democrat of New York and a primary sponsor of the 2010 law that set up the fund , said that she recognized those concerns but that the decision was the correct one . “ I think it ’ s an important statement that the country ’ s going to take care of the workers and people who are there to save the lives of the people of the city , ” she said .
One cancer patient who typifies the fraught nature of the decision , Ernest K. Matthews , 62 , said he developed lung cancer in 2008 and had part of his right lung cut out . He was part of a crew that cleaned elevators for the Merrill Lynch building next to ground zero after the terrorist attack . He was also a smoker .
But he said he had been able to walk up six flights of stairs carrying a heavy tool bag without catching his breath before Sept. 11 . He developed breathing problems soon after , he said .
“ It ’ s a good day , ” Mr. Matthews said Friday . “ Look at all the people that suffered and lost their lives , sacrificing for the cleanup . It took so long for them to decide to help the people that were suffering . ”
Dr. Howard ’ s decision represented an about-face from assurances by the federal government immediately after the terrorist attacks that there was nothing in the air to be worried about . In July 2011 , Dr. Howard himself said there was not enough scientific or medical evidence to link cancer to Sept. 11 .
But in a lengthy report explaining his decision , Dr. Howard said that a New York Fire Department study published last fall in the British medical journal The Lancet , which showed that firefighters exposed to ground zero toxic substances had about 20 percent higher rate of cancer than firefighters who were not exposed , had provided a strong foundation for a conclusion that some cancers had been caused by exposure to the World Trade Center debris .
Beyond the Lancet study , he said , he had relied on recommendations made in late March by a scientific and technical advisory committee consisting of experts from the fields of cancer , environmental medicine , toxicology and epidemiology as well as neighborhood activists and union officials . He fully adopted the committee ’ s recommendation that 14 broad categories of cancer , encompassing 50 specific types , should be deemed as related to the attacks .
Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you 're not a robot by clicking the box . Invalid email address . Please re-enter . You must select a newsletter to subscribe to . Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content , updates and promotions from The New York Times . You may opt-out at any time . You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times 's products and services . Thank you for subscribing . An error has occurred . Please try again later . View all New York Times newsletters .
Among the cancers Dr. Howard approved are some of the most common , including lung , breast , colon , trachea , esophageal , kidney , bladder , skin , thyroid , blood and ovarian cancers . Dr. Howard also approved childhood cancers , which are relatively rare , because children are more susceptible to toxic substances .
People with covered cancers who lived , worked or attended school in Lower Manhattan — generally the area below Canal Street — between Sept. 11 , 2001 , and May 30 , 2002 , would be able to apply for compensation for their economic losses , pain and suffering . Until the decision on Friday , the only ailments approved for compensation were mainly respiratory and digestive ones . Survivors of patients who have died , as well as people caught in the dust cloud downtown on the day of the attack , may also apply .
The amount of compensation will depend on the severity of the illness and duration of exposure , as proven by records like employment or housing documents , or city personnel records for fire , police and other public workers .
The new rules would apply to Pentagon and Shanksville , Pa. , responders as well , and it allows those cancer patients to tap into a treatment fund to pay for medical costs not covered by insurance .
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg , who has consistently deferred to scientific rulings on health hazards at ground zero , said that his administration had called for periodic reviews of the medical evidence on cancer , and that the decision was “ an important step . ”
The advisory committee had said that 70 known or potential carcinogens , including asbestos , arsenic and formaldehyde , had been found in the smoke , dust and fumes from the disaster , that 15 of those were known to cause cancer in humans , and that 37 were “ reasonably anticipated ” to cause cancer .
The advisory committee considered but rejected , by a 14-to-3 vote , the notion of adding all cancers to the list . It explicitly rejected pancreas , brain and prostate cancers , for various reasons . The committee could meet again to discuss other potential additions to the list .
The broad sweep of the committee ’ s recommendation raised some eyebrows among epidemiologists , several of whom have said that it appeared the committee was appealing to societal concerns that the cancer patients not be left out of the fund .
“ Clearly this was a difficult decision , and primarily motivated by concern for a sympathetic population , ” said Dr. Alfred I. Neugut , an oncologist and professor of epidemiology at the Mailman School of Public Health at Columbia . “ The scientific evidence currently is certainly weak ; whether future evidence bears out the wisdom of this decision will have to be seen . ”
Dr. Howard made a nod toward a concern of some epidemiologists that because cancer was a common disease , it would be hard to distinguish who got cancer because of Sept. 11 from those who did not . He also said that hard scientific data conclusively linking Sept. 11 to cancer might take years to obtain .
“ Requiring evidence of positive associations from studies of 9/11-exposed populations exclusively does not serve the best interests ” of the patients , he wrote .