Interviews with businesses and trade groups show a White House under huge pressure . Obamacare : How business won
Ron Pollack has been one of the White House ’ s closest allies on Obamacare , going to countless meetings and strategy sessions when the bill was crafted and since it was passed .
“ I didn ’ t get a heads-up , ” the founder and longtime leader of Families USA said in an interview after the administration announced it would delay the Obamacare employer coverage requirements for a year .
Even some of the business lobbyists who had urged the administration to push back its rules were unprepared for the news that appeared on a Treasury blog Tuesday evening , when much of Washington had already left town for the holiday .
“ Honestly , it was a surprise that it came this quickly , ” said Matt Haller , vice president of the International Franchise Association . “ We certainly felt like we were making headway , but we didn ’ t get any hints until yesterday . ”
Interviews with business associations and health care groups show an administration under huge pressure as a major deadline for President Barack Obama ’ s signature legislative achievement neared . The business lobbyists mounted a coordinated campaign to convince senior White House officials that their date for requiring coverage was simply impractical . Ultimately , the White House agreed .
Neither the White House nor Treasury disclosed the timeline of their decision to put off until 2015 the penalties on employers that don ’ t offer workers affordable health care . Those rules apply to businesses with more than 50 workers , the vast majority of which already provide health insurance to employees . Smaller businesses were , and remain , exempt .
Treasury itself acknowledged the rules — which were not finalized yet even though they were supposed to go into effect within months — were not simple , to say the least .
“ We have heard concerns about the complexity of the requirements and the need for more time to implement them effectively , ” assistant secretary for tax policy Mark Mazur wrote in announcing the delay . “ We are working hard to adapt and to be flexible about reporting requirements as we implement the law . ”
For the health wonks and government economists calculating insurance takeup rates and subsidies , the delay is probably a wash . While there may be some winners and some losers , the overall number of people gaining health insurance in 2014 probably won ’ t change all that much .
But politically , the announcement gave Republicans a fresh reason to declare Obamacare a “ train wreck ” that ’ s nowhere near ready for prime time .
The president ’ s health law was basically built on a trio of “ shared responsibilities ” — individuals have to get insurance , employers have to provide insurance and the government helps people who can ’ t afford insurance .
For the business world , the timing may have been a surprise , but the planning had been meticulous .
The White House has held many meetings with business groups — sometimes about the health law , sometimes more general . Business lobbyists returned to the health law rules in both settings , time and again . They spent time with high-level officials , including Nancy-Ann DeParle , Gene Sperling , Alan Krueger , Melody Barnes and Valerie Jarrett , some of whom have since left the White House .
“ I can ’ t tell you how many times we met with them , ” said Neil Trautwein , vice president of the National Retail Federation , recounting his frequent conversations with White House and Treasury officials .
“ I ’ ve got to give them credit for reaching out to us and working to understand our concerns , and I think eventually , not because of any special thing we did , they came to the view that this was not going to be ready for prime time , ” Trautwein added .
Several trade groups had fly-ins so Washington officials could hear from business owners across the country . The National Restaurant Association , the National Retail Federation , the National Council of Chain Restaurants and chambers of commerce were among those that took part , said Stephen Caldeira , president of the International Franchise Association .
CORRECTION : Corrected by : Kourtney Geers @ 07/04/2013 12:14 PM CORRECTION : An earlier version of this story misidentified Rep. Jim McDermott 's position on the House Ways and Means Committee . He is a senior Democrat on the panel .