Leaders of the 26 states that challenged the federal health care law in court have one luxury with the outcome -- they can do nothing .
While the Supreme Court upheld the bulk of the Affordable Care Act , it did rein in the law 's expansion of Medicaid by ruling that the federal government could not withhold Medicaid funds to those states that do n't comply . The absence of any punitive measures means there is nothing to compel the governors or attorneys general to begin implementation of the law .
Republican Wisconsin Gov . Scott Walker , for one , made clear his state will sit tight .
`` We 'll look to the fall and if there is a new president and a new Senate that 's part of a Congress willing to change , that 's the next step -- political , '' Walker said .
His voice was part of a quickly rising chorus of conservatives who took to the Internet and the airwaves raising political donations and rallying support for Mitt Romney 's campaign after the ruling , in hopes of electing the candidate who vows to repeal the law . `` If the American people do n't want ObamaCare , it 's a political issue and it 's about this fall 's presidential race , '' said GOP Kansas Gov . Sam Brownback .
One health care lobbyist told ███ that even if states wanted to implement the provision in the Affordable Care Act , they could n't .
The provisions require staffing levels that do not exist and do not have funding , the lobbyist said , adding it would take years to iron out the specifics needed to put the law into action . `` It ca n't work the way it 's on the books right now . Part of that is that there is so much haze within the act , '' said Robert Slayton of the Illinois Association of Health Care Underwriters .
The `` haze '' comes from 2,700 pages of legal language in the act . Those pages contain provisions that have yet to see the light of day . When the public and the health care industry learn the requirements of those provisions , inevitably they may conflict with the interests of the states . That means new legal challenges are sure to follow . `` You 'll see a dozen more battles in the coming years ... and some of them will be in the Supreme Court , '' said Anup Malani , health law expert at the University of Chicago .
Slayton said the Affordable Care Act does not live up to its name and only addresses one of the problems with health care -- access .
But President Obama , in celebrating the court 's decision Thursday , called the ruling a `` victory '' for the American people and said he would not re-fight the political battle over the law .