There are three problems you could have imagined the manager ’ s amendment to the American Health Care Act trying to fix :
The Congressional Budget Office estimates the AHCA will lead 24 million more Americans to go uninsured , push millions more into the kind of super-high-deductible care Republicans criticized in the Affordable Care Act , and all that will happen while the richest Americans get hundreds of billions of dollars in tax cuts . Voters — including the downscale rural whites who propelled Donald Trump into the presidency — aren ’ t going to like any of that . Virtually every health policy analyst from every side of the aisle thinks the AHCA is poorly constructed and will lead to consequences even its drafters didn ’ t intend . Avik Roy argues there are huge implicit tax increases for the poor who get jobs that lift them out of Medicaid ’ s ranks . Bob Laszewski thinks the plan will drive healthy people out of the insurance markets , creating even worse premium increases than we ’ re seeing under Obamacare . Implementing this bill , as drafted , would be a disaster . As written , the AHCA is unlikely to pass the House , and so GOP leadership needs to give House conservatives more reasons to vote for the bill , even if those reasons leave the legislation less likely to succeed in the Senate . For this bill to fail in the House would embarrass Speaker Paul Ryan and President Trump .
Of the three problems in the AHCA , the third is by far the least serious — but it ’ s the only one the manager ’ s amendment even attempts to solve . These aren ’ t changes that address the core problems the GOP health care bill will create for voters , insurers , or states ; instead , it ’ s legislation that tries to solve some of the problems the bill creates for conservative legislators . It might yet fall short on even that count .
This is a trap for Republicans . Both the process and the substance of the American Health Care Act have revealed a political party that has lost sight of the fact that the true test of legislation isn ’ t whether it passes , but whether it works .
Republican leaders have moved this bill as fast as possible , with as little information as possible , and with no evident plan for what will happen if the bill actually becomes law and wreaks havoc in people ’ s lives . This is not the health reform package Donald Trump promised his voters , it ’ s not the health reform package conservative policy experts recommended to House Republicans , and it ’ s not the health reform package that polling shows people want .
About the only thing that can be said for the revised bill is this might be the health reform package that can pass the House . And that appears to be the only problem Republicans care to solve right now .
The major changes to the bill , which were first reported Politico and which ███ has now confirmed , are :
A change in the tax deductibility of medical expenses that the Senate could harness to boost tax credits for older Americans , to the tune of an estimated $ 85 billion
More flexibility for states to add work requirements to Medicaid
More flexibility for states to take their Medicaid funding as a lump-sum block grant rather than a per-person check
Accelerating the repeal of Obamacare ’ s tax increases by one year
Restricting people from rolling unused tax credit money into health savings accounts ( apparently to ease concerns of anti-abortion groups )
Changing Medicaid reimbursement procedures in a way that advantages county governments over state governments ( for idiosyncratic reasons , Republicans from New York are high on this provision )
States that haven ’ t accepted Obamacare ’ s Medicaid expansion will no longer have the opportunity to do so .
None of these provisions meaningfully change the underlying legislation , nor any of its flaws . These are mostly tweaks meant to win over hardcore conservatives and Congress members from New York .
The locus of effective opposition to the American Health Care Act has been the House Freedom Caucus . Monday night , its leader , Rep. Mark Meadows , sounded a pessimistic note .
`` There are some small tweaks that are good tweaks , but there 's not substantial changes in the manager 's amendment that would make anybody be more compelled to vote for this , '' he said . `` I do n't think that the bill will pass without substantial changes . ''
Meadows & Amash have both told me w/ full confidence that the GOP Obamacare replacement bill wo n't have enough votes despite Ryan 's changes — Haley Byrd ( @ byrdinator ) March 21 , 2017
Meadows may , of course , be wrong . Trump is lobbying individual House Republicans hard , and it ’ s possible a critical number of conservatives will be swayed by Ryan ’ s argument that this is their last , best , and only chance to repeal Obamacare .
But it ’ s also possible that the bill fails in the House . Some conservatives think they can get a better deal by holding strong , even though the better deal they seek would ensure the legislation is dead on arrival in the Senate , if it even makes it to the Senate .
One dynamic that may work against Ryan and the legislation is the secrecy , speed , and unilateralism of the process . The bill hasn ’ t been heavily debated or seriously amended in the committees . The changes to the bill were made by leadership , and they were made fast . Long legislative efforts are annoying for everyone involved , but the reason they ’ re undertaken is that the process leaves members feeling heard , and feeling bought into the end result .
Other than pressuring Ryan , rest of the membership has no direct control over bill text or votes for the remainder of the AHCA debate . |6 — Josh Huder ( @ joshHuder ) March 20 , 2017
The House GOP leadership has decided that their bill is unlikely to survive a longer and more open drafting process , and so they need to jam it through the House as fast as humanly possible . It took the House more than five months to pass the first iteration of the Affordable Care Act . Republicans are trying to clear their bill in mere weeks . ( See this excellent Sarah Kliff piece for more on the stunning hypocrisy at play here . )
What do Republicans think will happen if they actually pass this into law ?
I keep thinking about something that New York Times columnist Ross Douthat wrote today . “ Republican politicians may offer pandering promises of lower deductibles and co-pays , but the coherent conservative position is that cheaper plans with higher deductibles are a very good thing , ” he said . It ’ s a gently written sentence , but it ’ s damning beyond measure .
Republicans have been promising the literal opposite of the bill they are trying to pass . Trump swore he ’ d oppose Medicaid cuts — but this law has more than $ 800 billion of them . He said everyone would be covered — but the CBO estimates this bill will push up the ranks of the uninsured by 24 million people . Republicans everywhere said they would replace Obamacare with a plan that ensured more competition , lower premiums and deductibles , and an end to skyrocketing annual increases — but this bill will have the opposite effect for most of those affected .
So what happens when voters realize their new tax credit doesn ’ t cover anything close to the insurance they had ? What happens when they find themselves with fewer choices , paying much higher premiums after their smaller subsidies , and being told by insurers that costs are doubling because Republicans changed how much more the old could be charged than the young ?
Voters will notice all this . And what are Republicans going to say then ? That it ’ s all Barack Obama ’ s fault ? That high deductibles are actually good , they just forgot to mention it ? That they needed something they could pass quickly so they could move on to tax reform ?
This bill has always seemed like an answer to the question , “ What can we pass that would count as repealing and replacing Obamacare ? ” But that ’ s not the right question . The right question is , “ What can we pass that will actually make people ’ s lives better ? ” Given the truncated , fearful process Republicans have retreated behind , I ’ m not persuaded even they believe this bill is the answer .