The public continues to be ill-informed about the health reform law , the authors say . | REUTERS Keeping Obamacare debate honest
Although the federal government is currently shut down as a result of Republican efforts to defund the Affordable Care Act , many important debates over health policy going forward will take place at the state level . Unfortunately , continuing public confusion over the law is likely to be exploited by opportunistic politicians if they aren ’ t fact-checked aggressively by the press .
The federal government is running most of the state health care exchanges , but the political battle over Obamacare is increasingly playing out in the states , whose governments must decide how to implement the law and whether to allow residents expanded coverage under Medicaid . Politicians across the spectrum spun a range of narratives about last week ’ s launch of the exchanges , which saw high traffic and embarrassing technical glitches . These are only the first steps in a long rollout process that is sure to be politicized even further .
Unfortunately , the public continues to be confused and ill-informed about the health reform law . In particular , a number of misperceptions about the ACA linger , including the false claim that it would create “ death panels. ” As insurance plans offered through the exchanges take effect next year , even more myths and falsehoods about Obamacare are likely to emerge as elected officials make bogus claims about the risks or benefits to the public .
Research shows that it is difficult to correct misperceptions when people are motivated to believe in them . However , we can still improve the debate over Obamacare by reducing the incentives for elected officials to make false or misleading statements about the law . Ideological stalwarts might not change their beliefs about the proper role of government in health care , but they are capable of changing the claims they make publicly about the law and its implementation . The question is how to get them to do so .
Our research suggests that politicians are generally sensitive to the possibility that statements they make will be publicly fact-checked . Currently , the claims politicians make about Obamacare receive too little scrutiny from the media , especially at the state and local levels . Even if a dubious statement is covered in the press or recorded and disseminated online , news outlets ranging from ABC to The Associated Press have proved susceptible to reporting such events in a neutral “ he said , she said ” manner rather than attempting to set the record straight . As a result , political figures have little reason not to make misleading assertions .
More aggressive fact-checking could help change those incentives . During the final months of the 2012 election , we conducted a field experiment among nearly 1,200 legislators from nine states in which affiliates of the nonpartisan fact-checking website PolitiFact were in operation . Starting in August 2012 , we sent letters to approximately 400 of those lawmakers describing how negative fact-checking ratings could threaten their reputations and electoral prospects .
In our study , 2.7 percent of legislators who were not sent reminders about fact checking received a negative PolitiFact rating or had the accuracy of their statements questioned publicly . Among legislators who were sent warning letters about fact checking , this likelihood declined to just 1 percent — a 63 percent decrease in relative risk . These results , which we describe further in a New America Foundation report and academic working paper , suggest that fact checking can help to change politicians ’ behavior , which in turn could have major implications for how well the public understands important policy issues .
The problem is not only the lack of fact checking in the media but also the targets that fact checkers select . Most of their efforts during the 2012 election were devoted to the presidential campaigns , which are relatively insensitive to negative coverage and wield vast advertising budgets that allow them to overshadow the press . State officials typically receive far less coverage , including very few fact checks . As a result , we should expect them to be more sensitive to the added scrutiny of fact checking .
Politics is inevitably messy . But fact checking can improve the odds that at least one of the news options in the health care debate contains the truth .
Brendan Nyhan is assistant professor of government at Dartmouth College and a media critic for Columbia Journalism Review . Jason Reifler is senior lecturer in politics at the University of Exeter .