People are already finding out their old plans don ’ t measure up to the ACA ’ s standards . Obamacare losers could pack punch
Millions of married , older , white , college-educated , GOP-leaning Americans have quickly seen their political profile rise after their health insurance companies sent them cancellation letters with the launch of the giant new health care law .
It ’ s not a huge segment of the population — estimates show between 10 million to 19 million people bought health insurance from what Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius dubbed the “ Wild West ” individual marketplace .
But the ones who are making the most anti-Obamacare noise are part of this group ( think of the self-employed , small business owners , freelance writers , musicians and taxi cab drivers ) that share one politically pertinent common denominator . Their complaints — amplified in recent weeks by Republicans and reporters — demonstrate one of the first tangible stumbles of the Affordable Care Act .
“ It ’ s not theoretical anymore , ” said Virginia-based health industry consultant Robert Laszewski . “ You can spin in the White House press room , but these are people who will be sitting down with their friends and families at Thanksgiving sharing stories about their cancellation letters . That ’ s going to be the only thing that counts . ”
Horror stories already abound of people who can ’ t get insurance through their employer and are now finding that their old plans don ’ t measure up to Obamacare ’ s standards . There may indeed be better policies around the corner , giving people more protections when they actually do get sick and requiring guaranteed coverage for things like prescription drugs , emergency hospital visits , maternity and mental health and not being black listed due to a preexisting condition .
Still , it ’ s the shock of the change — especially after President Barack Obama repeatedly promised that anyone could keep the plan that they had — that is very real and threatens to resonate through the 2014 midterm campaign .
“ [ Obama ] may have known this is a more sophisticated issue – you ’ re going to get better , more benefits – but people who hear politicians are very literal , ” said Harvard professor Bob Blendon , an expert on public attitudes toward health care policy .
Critics of the law are all too eager to share the spotlight with the slighted . On Wednesday , the Republican National Committee launched a website soliciting photos and scanned-in copies of letters from insurance companies that cited Obamacare as the reason for ending a policy . Glenn Beck suggests using the hashtag # InsuranceCanceled on Twitter . A tea party group that touted Herman Cain ’ s 2012 presidential bid has its own repository .
It all adds up to trouble for an Obama White House already on its heels for weeks dealing with a twitchy website . Now , it also has to answer toangry middle-class Americans armed with stories that humanize what ’ s largely been a battle fought in the policy weeds .
During a pair of House hearings this week , Republicans read aloud a series of constituent letters complaining about losing their self-purchased health insurance .
“ It ’ s what they wanted , ” Rep. Marsha Blackburn ( R-Tenn. ) said during a heated confrontation with Sebelius . “ And I ’ ll remind you some people like to drive a Ford and not a Ferrari . And some people like to drink out of a red Solo cup , not a crystal stem . You ’ re taking away their choice . ”
Sebelius replied that people who got cancellation notices must be offered new insurance plans either inside the new Obamacare marketplace or — if they don ’ t qualify for federal subsidies — inside or outside the marketplace . “ They absolutely will have new coverage , ” she said .
Obama himself acknowledged some people would lose their insurance during a health care speech Wednesday in Boston , though he also took aim at the “ bad-apple insurers ” who have been selling “ cut-rate plans that don ’ t offer real financial protection in the event of a serious illness or an accident . ”
“ Now , if you had one of these substandard plans before the Affordable Care Act became law and you really liked that plan , you ’ re able to keep it . That ’ s what I said when I was running for office . That was part of the promise we made , ” Obama said . “ But ever since the law was passed , if insurers decided to downgrade or cancel these substandard plans , what we said under the law is you ’ ve got to replace them with quality , comprehensive coverage — because that , too , was a central premise of the Affordable Care Act from the very beginning . ”
So who falls into the roughly five percent of the U.S. population that is actually getting these cancellation letters ?
For starters , it ’ s not the 156 million working-age Americans who get their health insurance through employers , or 60.2 million who are covered by public programs , like Medicaid , the Children ’ s Health Insurance Program or Veterans Affairs insurance .
Major insurance companies contacted by ███ didn ’ t have demographic information on their customers . But the U.S. Census Bureau , think tanks and private foundations that track health care issues do have an idea .
According to Census Bureau data , 11.2 million people between 2010 and 2012 reported being a part of the private insurance marketplace , with large population states like California , Texas , Florida and New York providing the lion ’ s share of customers . But several smaller states also had large amounts of people who purchased their own insurance , including Colorado ( 275,000 people ) , Missouri ( 261,000 people ) , Oregon ( 192,000 people ) and North Dakota ( 46,000 people ) .
Census data also shows about 4.6 million people who purchased their own insurance were married with the spouse present , with 1 million divorcees and 5.1 million people who never were married .
At the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation , a July survey found 81 percent of the people who bought their own insurance were white , with more than 60 percent married and living with their spouse . Forty-five percent said they had two children living in the household . Nearly half were between the ages of 18 and 44 .