House Republicans will unveil a health plan Wednesday that has been six years in the making , calling for an end to the heavy mandates and government-run exchanges of Obamacare in favor of incentives designed to entice customers into private-market plans .
The plan also embraces longtime Republican favorites such as allowing insurance companies to sell policies across state lines — a key part of the health care proposal from Donald Trump , the party ’ s presumptive presidential nominee — and calls for high-risk pools to provide coverage for sick Americans who are priced out of the private market .
The crux of the proposal is a tax credit intended to help offset the costs of insurance for those who don ’ t receive coverage through their employers or government programs .
Spearheaded by House Speaker Paul D. Ryan of Wisconsin , the proposal is an election-year blueprint rather than a bill .
Many of the details will remain vague because Republicans won ’ t bring the proposal to the floor for a vote and the Congressional Budget Office can ’ t score it . It ’ s unclear whether the plan would provide coverage to as many Americans as President Obama ’ s Affordable Care Act or what the cost to taxpayers would be .
Yet it is a significant milestone for a party that has struggled with the second half of its repeal-and-replace strategy on Obamacare , as long as its namesake wields a veto from the White House .
House Republicans have taken dozens of votes to repeal all or part of Mr. Obama ’ s signature 2010 reforms since taking the majority in 2011 , yet they have failed to unify around a viable alternative despite a handful of plans that overlap in places .
“ Today we are proposing a new approach . This report is the beginning of the conversation , not the end , ” the plan says . “ In contrast to Obamacare , our plan will serve as the foundation for multiple pieces of straightforward legislation , not a comprehensive , overly complex , and confusing 3,000 page bill . ”
Premiums on Obamacare ’ s web-based exchanges are expected to rise next year , handing Republicans more ammunition to convince voters that the health care act is raising costs , offering subsidies that discourage work and imposing mandates that slash part-time jobs .
Their argument has been overshadowed by Mr. Trump ’ s blunt positions on illegal immigration and his proposal to ban Muslims from entering the U.S. until the federal government can better control the threat of Islamic terrorism .
“ So far , Trump has been kind of erratic on health care policy and has not given us a really strong sense of what he would do , ” said Lanhee J. Chen , a fellow at Stanford University ’ s Hoover Institution and adviser to Mitt Romney ’ s 2012 presidential campaign . “ I think as a result , a lot of conservatives have been apprehensive about supporting or saying nice things about Trump . I would hope that Trump would simply take the [ House Republican ] plan and use it . ”
The plan does keep parts of Obamacare in place , including letting young adults stay on their parents ’ plans until age 26 . It also prohibits denial of coverage to people with preexisting medical conditions .
Yet Republicans envision a one-time open enrollment period for uninsured Americans , regardless of how sick they are . They would receive a refundable tax credit large enough to purchase the typical pre-2010 plan .
Rather than Obamacare ’ s income-based system , it would be age-adjusted so that older Americans receive more support .
Consumers whose premiums are lower than the credit may use the balance to pay out-of-pocket costs or pad health savings accounts — tax-advantaged funds that encourage savings for medical expenses .
Among other limits , the plan would keep older consumers from having to pay more than five times the premium of a younger person , a return to the pre-2010 standard in place of Obamacare ’ s 3-1 ratio .
“ The ill-advised 3-1 policy is leading to artificially higher premiums for millions of Americans , especially younger and healthier patients , ” the plan says .
The plan also delves into Medicare , the government insurance program for Americans 65 and older . Starting in 2024 , seniors could enroll in traditional Medicare or choose from competing private plans while receiving premium support from the federal government .
House Republicans and Mr. Trump have clashed over changes to Medicare . The Trump campaign did not return an emailed request for comment on the plan before its formal release .
Meanwhile , presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton says she will build on Obamacare ’ s reforms , and House Democrats vowed Tuesday to defend Mr. Obama ’ s health care legacy .
Democrats said it was about time that Republicans came up with a plan of their own , though they criticized its lack of granular detail and said Obamacare and its historic gains in health care coverage are here to stay .
A senior House Republican aide said it is not unusual to leave the finer points of a plan to relevant House committees , much as Democrats did in the period between Mr. Obama ’ s election in late 2008 and Obamacare ’ s passage in March 2010 .
“ This plan is not the final piece of the puzzle , ” the blueprint says . “ This overall plan , and the policy solutions within it , is part of a larger conversation with the American people about what their health care needs truly are . ”