The AFL-CIO approved a resolution saying that President Obama 's health care overhaul will drive up the costs of union-sponsored health plans to the point that workers and employers are forced to abandon them .
In a strongly worded resolution released Wednesday , the federation said that labor unions still support the Affordable Care Act 's overall goals of reducing health costs and bringing coverage to all Americans , but added that the law is being implemented in a way that is `` highly disruptive '' to union health care plans .
Some individual unions have complained about the law 's impact for months , but the resolution marks the first time the nation 's largest labor federation has gone on record embracing that view . Unions were among the most enthusiastic backers of the law when it passed in 2010 .
A labor official told The Associated Press that White House officials had been calling labor leaders for days to urge them not to voice their concerns in the form of a resolution . The official , who was n't authorized to discuss the conversations publicly and requested anonymity , said many union leaders insisted that they wanted to highlight their concerns .
Asked about any efforts to discourage unions from passing the resolution , the White House said in a statement Wednesday night that officials `` are in regular contact with a variety of stakeholders , including unions , as part of our efforts to ensure smooth implementation and to improve the law . ''
The AFL-CIO , one of the president 's major boosters , approved the resolution just as the administration began rolling out a multimillion-dollar advertising campaign to encourage Americans to sign up for health care exchanges starting Oct. 1 .
Harold Schaitberger , president of the International Association of Firefighters , said the intent of the resolution is to `` point out the criticisms without being overly caustic . ''
`` There have to be some changes made in the area that are giving a number of our unions great concern , '' said Schaitberger , who chaired the committee that hammered out the resolution 's language .
The resolution was approved at the AFL-CIO 's quadrennial convention in Los Angeles . It claims the new law will increase costs for health plans that are jointly administered by unions and smaller employers in the construction , retail and transportation industries . That could encourage employers to hire fewer union workers or abandon the health plans altogether and force union members to seek lower quality coverage on the new health exchanges .
Union officials are seeking rule changes that would make their low-income workers eligible for the same types of federal subsidies they could get in the exchanges . They have also suggested rules that would treat their multi-employer plans as qualified exchange plans under the new law .
But the Congressional Research Service issued a memo earlier this year finding that neither change is allowed through rulemaking . The AFL-CIO resolution calls for the law to be amended by Congress if new rules can not satisfy their concerns .
AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka held meetings at the White House last month in which he and other union leaders pressed the administration to make changes . Trumka has said he is encouraged that the White House is listening , but that no firm proposals have been made .
In a statement issued earlier Wednesday , the White House said there is nothing in the Affordable Care Act that changes the law for union plans . The statement said the White House would continue to work with unions and other stakeholders on ways to ensure smooth implementation of the law .
The AFL-CIO resolution was toned down from a draft originally offered by Sean McGarvey , head of the AFL-CIO 's Building and Construction Trades Department . The early draft said the AFL-CIO could no longer support the health care law and called for its repeal unless changes were made to protect union multi-employer plans .
Republican critics of the health care law have seized on the union complaints to fuel their push to repeal the law . At the same time , GOP leaders have warned the White House against carving out any special deal for unions .
`` We will do whatever is within our power to ensure that the administration does not once again provide a special exemption to unions at the expense of American taxpayers , '' Michigan Rep. Dave Camp and Utah Sen. Orrin Hatch wrote in a letter this week to Treasury Secretary Jack Lew . Camp is chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee and Hatch is top Republican on the Senate Finance Committee .