CLOSE In an interview with the Christian Broadcasting Network , President Donald Trump said that Republicans must come together on a replacement for the Affordable Care Act . ( July 12 ) AP
WASHINGTON — Senate Republican leaders added new language to their health care bill Thursday to allow the sale of cheap , bare-bones insurance plans in an attempt to draw enough conservative support to pass the measure to replace Obamacare .
At the same time , the bill gives moderates more of what they want by increasing funding to fight opioid addiction from $ 2 billion in the original bill to $ 45 billion in the latest draft .
However , two Republicans — moderate Sen. Susan Collins of Maine and conservative Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky — said Thursday they will not even vote for a procedural motion to allow a vote on the health care bill next week .
Collins tweeted that there are `` still deep cuts to Medicaid in Senate bill '' and said she wants to work with senators of both parties to `` fix flaws '' in the Affordable Care Act , better known as Obamacare .
Senate leaders can not lose more than two of the chamber 's 52 Republicans or they wo n't be able to pass the bill , which is opposed by Democrats .
The draft bill , released on the Senate Budget Committee 's website , tries to appeal to conservatives by including a version of an amendment by Sen. Ted Cruz , R-Texas , that would allow the sale of deregulated insurance plans as long as Obamacare-compliant plans are also still sold .
Cruz confirmed to reporters that his amendment is in the bill and called that `` very significant progress . ''
“ If this is the bill , I will support it , ” Cruz told reporters Thursday afternoon .
But Sen. Mike Lee , R-Utah , who helped craft the original amendment with Cruz , was undecided about how he would vote on the bill because the amendment was changed during negotiations , his spokesman said .
Insurance companies have strongly opposed the Cruz amendment , saying it would cause more instability in the marketplace . Supporters of the plan say it will give consumers the option to choose the right plan for their lifestyle . But critics say older and sicker Americans will end up paying much more for their more robust coverage .
The revised proposal would continue the Affordable Care Act 's taxes on high-income earners to help subsidize care for lower-income Americans .
It also provides an additional $ 70 billion to help states lower the cost of insurance for their residents through cost-sharing plans or allowing people to use health savings accounts to pay for their premiums . That money would be added onto the $ 112 billion in the original bill .
There would be more options for Americans to buy lower-cost plans in addition to costlier plans that provide more coverage and lower deductibles .
Anyone in the individual market would be allowed to buy a lower-cost plan . These plans would have higher deductibles than plans currently provided under Obamacare . They would cover three primary care visits a year and have some protections to limit out-of-pockets costs .
The bill would reduce the amount of federal Medicaid funds provided to states beginning in 2021 while continuing coverage for children with `` medically complex disabilities . '' It allows states to choose between block grants and per capita allotments for low-income residents who receive Medicaid .
`` This is our opportunity to really make a difference on health care , '' Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. , said Thursday in a speech on the Senate floor . `` Failure to act means more families get hurt by Obamacare as it continues to collapse . It also means the law ’ s problems will grow more formidable , making them even harder to solve ... So it ’ s time to rise to the occasion . ''
It was still not clear Thursday afternoon whether the changes would attract enough votes to pass the legislation , which Republicans are calling the Better Care Reconciliation Act .
Key moderate Republicans such as Sens . Dean Heller of Nevada , Lisa Murkowski of Alaska , Rob Portman of Ohio and Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia said they needed to take a close look at the bill 's details before saying whether they could support it . All of them opposed the earlier version of the legislation .
Murkowski expressed irritation that reporters and lobbyists had seen the new bill before many GOP senators had .
`` I think that as a courtesy to those of us that are making decisions that we would actually have an opportunity to see it first , '' she told the clutch of reporters who mobbed her for comment . `` I have n't seen it . ''
About 10 GOP senators opposed the initial Republican bill that was unveiled last month , and McConnell scrapped a planned vote at the end of June .
Democrats have been united in opposing the bill , calling on Republicans to instead work with them to try to fix problems with the existing Obamacare system .
McConnell hopes to hold a vote on the revised bill next week , after the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office releases a new analysis of what it will cost and how many people it would insure . The bill 's supporters must first get 51 votes on a motion to proceed to the bill before a vote is taken on the actual legislation .
Sens . Lindsey Graham , R-S.C. , and Bill Cassidy , R-La. , offered an alternative Thursday that they said could help attract 50 votes if the latest proposal from GOP leaders does n't .
Graham and Cassidy said the goal was not to undercut McConnell 's plan , but to offer another option .
Their plan would leave taxes on wealthy individuals in place and send the current federal funding for Obamacare , estimated at about $ 110 billion last year , to the states in the form of block grants that governors could use however they want . Graham said states could keep Obamacare in place or replace it with a new system .
`` Instead of having a one-size-fits-all solution from Washington , we should return dollars back to the states to address each individual state ’ s health care needs , '' Graham said . `` Just like no two patients are the same , no two states ’ health care needs are the same ... The state would have a pot of money from the federal government to get the best health care outcomes for their residents . ''
Sen. Ron Johnson , R-Wis. , who opposed last month 's version of the GOP health care bill , said the Graham-Cassidy alternative `` actually has some appeal to me . ''
`` I just do n't like a federal definition of health insurance , '' he said in explaining why he might support the amendment .
He said he is leaning toward voting in favor of a final bill next week unless there is something `` awful '' in it .
Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y. , said the latest version of the GOP health care bill is `` even meaner '' than the original , in part because the Cruz amendment lowers premiums by creating huge increases in deductibles and co-pays .
`` Out-of-pocket expenses would actually go up , not down , '' Schumer said .
He also said `` it appears little has changed at the core of the bill . '' The legislation still slashes Medicaid , hurting rural hospitals , Americans in nursing homes and opioid addicts who use Medicaid to pay for treatment programs , Schumer said .
Democrats also complained that the bill still defunds Planned Parenthood , cuts taxes on insurers and imposes higher costs on Americans in their 50s and 60s who are n't old enough for Medicare .
`` So what 's new ? '' Schumer said . `` It appears there is a new $ 60 billion tax break on health savings accounts , which only benefits those wealthy enough to pay for them . ''
A health savings account allows people to save money tax-free to use to help pay for insurance policies with high deductibles .