The damage control continues .... but is it too late ? During an interview with NBC News today at the White House , President Obama apologized to Americans who have lost their health insurance , despite numerous promises they could keep insurance they liked under Obamacare .
`` I am sorry that they are finding themselves in this situation based on assurances they got from me , '' he told NBC News in an exclusive interview at the White House .
`` We 've got to work hard to make sure that they know we hear them and we are going to do everything we can to deal with folks who find themselves in a tough position as a consequence of this. ``
Obama 's apology comes after adding a grandfathering caveat to his healthcare pitch during a speech to Obama for America supporters in Washington D.C. last week .
“ If you had or have one of these plans before the Affordable Care Act came into law , ” the president said , “ and you really like that plan , what we said was , you could keep it… if it hasn ’ t changed since the law ’ s passed . ”
The administration has been denying for nearly two weeks that President Obama lied or misled millions of people about keeping their health insurance plans . NBC News and other major news outlets reported last week the White House knew for years cancellation letters would be issued and told Americans they could keep their plans anyway .
Millions of Americans are getting their health insurance canceled under the Affordable Care Act and the Obama administration has known for about three years that this would happen , NBC News is reporting .
About 50 % to 75 % of 14 million consumers who buy health insurance individually will receive a `` cancellation '' letter or its equivalent in the next year because their current policies do n't meet the standards laid out by the new law , the news organization reports , citing four sources deeply involved in ACA .
Democratic Senators on Capitol Hill are scrambling to pass legislation that will allow millions of Americans who have received cancellation notices to get their healthcare plans back . It is unclear if President Obama is willing to support that effort .
Sixty-seven percent of Americans in the individual health insurance market are expected to lose their current health plans as insurance companies comply with Obamacare requirements under the law .