This is the web version of VoxCare , a daily newsletter from ███ on the latest twists and turns in America ’ s health care debate . Like what you ’ re reading ? Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox here .
If you have n't noticed , I love some good new research that challenges the conventional wisdom . We 've got a live one today .
You hear it everywhere you go , from true experts to lawmakers to the average Joe or Joan on the street : The uninsured just go to the emergency room when they need medical care , and that 's one thing that keeps driving up our health care costs .
But a new paper at Health Affairs , authored by researchers from Harvard , the University of Chicago , and MIT , challenges that assumption .
They actually found that uninsured adults go to the emergency room about as much as people with private insurance ( 12.2 percent of the uninsured made an ER visit in 2013 compared to 11.1 percent of the privately insured ) and much less than the people on Medicaid ( 29.3 percent ) .
So uninsured Americans do n't actually go to the ER any more than people with insurance : 13.7 percent across private and public coverage .
But the uninsured do , this study found , get outpatient care less frequently .
███-mark Sign up for the newsletter VoxCare Email ( required ) Zip Code By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the data transfer policy . For more newsletters , check out our newsletters page Subscribe
It 's an interesting twist on one of the most commonly pondered problems of American health care . The problem is not so much that the uninsured go to the emergency room more than other people .
The problem might be instead that they do n't get other kinds of care as often . Why is that ? The authors wrapped up their findings like this :
The Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act ( EMTALA ) provides the uninsured with a legal right to care through the ED , although it does not protect them against the financial consequences of expensive ED visits . The uninsured , however , may be legally denied care in non-ED settings . Other nonfinancial barriers to health care access for poor populations — both insured and uninsured — include factors such as stigma , difficulty finding and building relationships with providers , and confusion about insurance benefits or the cost of care .
Our misconception about the uninsured and the emergency room might live on because they `` are most likely encountered in the ED , '' the authors wrote .
And given what we know about primary care ( the most basic form of outpatient care ) and early intervention in preventing illness and deaths , this is another the data point to consider as we debate the value of universal health coverage .
`` Healthcare is a single word because it ’ s a single concept . ''
For example , `` mental health care '' is care for mental health . `` Mental healthcare '' would mean that the healthcare itself is mental , which is not a thing .
The great “ health care ” debate of 2017 . When the AP Stylebook suggested it might revisit its guidance that `` health care '' is two words ( which it is ) , Health Policy Twitter exploded . It was a little silly but also a lot of fun — and , I 'd argue , forces you to think about what health care really is .
Josh Zeitlin at the Advisory Board Company did a nice job of summarizing everybody 's feelings . The quotes above from Ashish Jha , a physician and a professor at the Harvard T.H . Chan School of Public Health , and Sam Baker at Axios staked out the positions well .
“ Community health centers languish without federal funding ” : “ Community health centers that provide medical care to low-income people are laying off staff and reducing hours to grapple with Congress ’ inability to provide new federal funding for them. ” —Robert King , Washington Examiner
“ Community health centers that provide medical care to low-income people are laying off staff and reducing hours to grapple with Congress ’ inability to provide new federal funding for them. ” —Robert King , Washington Examiner “ POLITICO-Harvard poll : Democrats and Republicans still fixated on health care ” : “ With taxes and spending , debt and defense piled up on Congress ’ extremely full plate this month , a new poll by POLITICO and the Harvard T.H . Chan School of Public Health shows that Americans remain sharply focused on health care — but Republicans and Democrats aren ’ t looking at the same things. ” —Joanne Kenen , Politico
“ With taxes and spending , debt and defense piled up on Congress ’ extremely full plate this month , a new poll by POLITICO and the Harvard T.H . Chan School of Public Health shows that Americans remain sharply focused on health care — but Republicans and Democrats aren ’ t looking at the same things. ” —Joanne Kenen , Politico “ Arizona becomes the latest state to seek to limit Medicaid drug coverage ” : “ Arizona has become the latest state to seek permission from the federal government to limit the number of medicines that would be covered by its state Medicaid program , which is currently required to provide coverage for all treatments. ” —Ed Silverman , STAT
“ Forget Amazon . Health Companies Really Want to Be UnitedHealth ” : “ As the specter of Amazon.com Inc. looms over the health-care industry , it ’ s easy to see the tech giant ’ s threat as a major factor behind the megadeal between CVS Health Corp. and Aetna Inc . Yet the $ 67.5 billion deal will build a company to match up against a rival that already has businesses spread deep across the sector : UnitedHealth Group Inc. ” —Zachary Tracer , Bloomberg
“ As the specter of Amazon.com Inc. looms over the health-care industry , it ’ s easy to see the tech giant ’ s threat as a major factor behind the megadeal between CVS Health Corp. and Aetna Inc . Yet the $ 67.5 billion deal will build a company to match up against a rival that already has businesses spread deep across the sector : UnitedHealth Group Inc. ” —Zachary Tracer , Bloomberg “ Aetna , CVS merger sparks talk of Humana eyeing deal with Walmart ” : “ The $ 69 billion merger between CVS Health and Aetna , announced by CVS on Sunday , has spurred industry analysts to talk about a possible deal between Walmart and Humana , as the retailer feels the increased competition from an integrated pharmacy business and is currently in an arms race against online giant Amazon. ” —Susan Morse , Healthcare Finance
“ The $ 69 billion merger between CVS Health and Aetna , announced by CVS on Sunday , has spurred industry analysts to talk about a possible deal between Walmart and Humana , as the retailer feels the increased competition from an integrated pharmacy business and is currently in an arms race against online giant Amazon. ” —Susan Morse , Healthcare Finance “ Dangling A Carrot For Patients To Take Healthy Steps : Does It Work ? ” : “ Overall , research on the effectiveness of financial incentives for the Medicaid population has been mixed . A report this year by the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities found that they can induce people to keep an appointment or attend a class but are less likely to yield long-term behavior changes , such as weight loss. ” —Anna Gorman , Kaiser Health News
Are you an Obamacare enrollee interested in what happens next ? Join our Facebook community for conversation and updates .
Correction : This article originally misstated the university of one of the authors of the researcher paper . The author is from the University of Chicago , not the University of Illinois .