Last Friday , President Trump caused consternation among Democrats and their media allies by introducing an eminently sensible blueprint for reducing drug prices . The 50-point “ American Patients First ” plan addresses four broad challenges : High list prices for drugs , government programs overpaying for drugs , rising out-of-pocket costs for consumers , and foreign governments free-riding off American innovation . The blueprint relies on free market competition and private-sector negotiation rather than regulatory coercion and price controls . And , assuming his plan works as designed , President Trump will have succeeded where his predecessor proved utterly impotent . Consequently , the plan drew immediate criticism from the left .
The most common liberal complaint about the President ’ s blueprint involves his decision , as the New York Times laments , “ not to have the federal government directly negotiate lower drug prices for Medicare. ” Trump alarmed conservatives during his presidential campaign by flirting with that exceptionally bad policy idea , but sensibly abandoned it when working with his advisors to formulate a concrete plan . The term “ negotiate ” has no real meaning in the context of federal dealings with the drug industry . It is nothing more than a pseudonym for price controls . Allowing the government to “ negotiate ” with drug companies for lower Medicare drug prices would inevitably create shortages of badly needed pharmaceuticals .
That drug shortages would result from allowing Medicare to negotiate directly with drug companies is not a matter of speculation . We already have a huge federal bureaucracy that “ negotiates ” prices with drug companies — the Veterans Health Administration . And the results have been all too predictable . According to a study by Avalere , the VHA covers 16 percent fewer drugs than does Medicare Part D. Many of the medications not covered by the VHA are common generics . Not coincidentally , generic drugs figure prominently in Trump ’ s drug plan , which would increase industry competition by accelerating the speed with which such medications reach the market . On Friday , FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb put it as follows :
We ’ re helping remove barriers to generic drug development and market entry in an effort to spur competition that results in lower drug prices.… We ’ ve committed to timelier generic drug reviews to reduce the cycles of review that generic applications typically undergo . In 2017 , we approved a record number of generic drug applications… by ensuring that regulatory requirements are efficient , predictable and science-based ; we can help reduce the time , uncertainty and cost of generic and biosimilar product development .
In addition to reducing prices for generic drugs , the American Patients First plan includes a component that should provide significantly more power to Medicare Part D sponsors in their negotiations with pharmaceutical manufacturers . How is this different from allowing Medicare to negotiate directly with drug companies ? The Part D prescription drug benefit is administered through private insurance plans ( sponsors ) that compete for business based on costs and coverage . They negotiate prices individually with drug companies . This system has worked better than any other federal entitlement at controlling costs . But this program is now 15 years old and needs an “ upgrade. ” Friday , HHS secretary Alex Azar phrased it thus :
Over 15 years , as so often happens with government programs , it got frozen in place . And the private sector kept adapting and learning , especially after the economic crisis in 2007 , how to control drug spending even better.… Part D stayed more static . We need now to bring the same tools that are available to the private sector to those Part D drug plans so they can negotiate better . We need to unleash them so they can drive great deals for our seniors .
Obviously , reducing prices for generic drugs and the amounts paid by Medicare Part D for medications represents progress . But the President also plans to reduce out-of-pocket costs for patients by getting rid of the “ Pharmacist Gag Rule. ” There ’ s a middle man in almost every U.S. drug transaction called the pharmacy benefit manager ( PBM ) , a third party like Express Scripts that contracts with pharmacies , negotiates discounts with drug companies , processes prescription claims , etc . According to the American Pharmacists Association , they often impose clauses in pharmacy contracts that bar pharmacists from telling patients that they pay less out-of-pocket by not using insurance . On this topic , President Trump was typically blunt :
Our plan bans the Pharmacist Gag Rule , which punishes pharmacists for telling patients how to save money . This is a total rip-off , and we are ending it .
The President also spoke about a topic that has been widely misrepresented by the Democrats and their media mouthpieces — foreign free riding off American innovation . Bloomberg , for example , published a typical distortion of Trump ’ s plan in a “ news ” story under the following headline : “ Why Higher Drug Payments in Other Countries Won ’ t Help the U.S. ” Neither Trump nor anyone in his administration has suggested such a policy . The problem Trump wants to eliminate is unfair trade practices . The left has long claimed that drug companies charge more in the U.S. due to naked greed . Jerry Rogers , a former deputy VP at the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America , subjects that claim to a reality test at RealClearHealth :
It ’ s the threat of compulsory licensing that forces American companies to sell their products at price-controlled levels in foreign markets , again , driving up costs for Americans . The reason why drugs are so cheap in Canada , for instance , is because if an American company refuses to sell its medicine in Canada at the artificially set , government-mandated price , the Canadian government will just take the patent .
That ’ s what the President means when he says , “ When foreign governments extort unreasonably low prices from U.S. drug makers , Americans have to pay more to subsidize the enormous cost of research and development. ” No one , including the President , believes that Big Pharma is as pure as the driven snow . Trump also knows that the problem of high drug prices can ’ t be solved with panaceas like re-importation or government price controls . That realism is the best feature of his American Patients First plan . It addresses high drug prices as the complex problem that it is . Donald Trump has grown in office , but not in the usual way . He ’ s hasn ’ t been sucked down by the swamp . He ’ s learning to do the backstroke through the slime .