The backdrop for the downsizing is a fiscal crisis . Four years ago , Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates said health care costs were “ eating the Defense Department alive ” ; last year , they represented almost 10 percent of the defense budget . Close to half of the beds in military hospitals appear to sit vacant , significantly more than the civilian hospital average .
Behind those fiscal woes , though , is a hospital system at odds with itself , struggling with conflicting missions that , according to many people interviewed , put not just the Pentagon ’ s coffers but the quality of care and patient safety at risk .
Pentagon health leaders say their hospitals ’ paramount mission is military : to hone the skills that doctors and nurses will need in the carnage of combat . But their principal business is both broader and more mundane : They are essentially community hospitals , providing a smorgasbord of low-cost primary and specialty care , from births to breast implants to appendectomies .
Especially , but not only , at smaller hospitals , the military priorities undercut the day-to-day delivery of health care , doctors and nurses say .
Inexperienced doctors often assume outsize responsibilities because military policies encourage more experienced and ambitious clinicians to become administrators . Continuity , so crucial to medical care , is lost as hospital commanders and doctors , as well as patients , constantly rotate from post to post . The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have taken an especially heavy toll : With many military doctors and nurses overseas , hospitals have been forced to shunt patients to civilian care , leaving empty beds and out-of-practice medical staffs .
To some veterans of the system , the inherent incongruities raise the question of whether , with limited exceptions , the military should even be in the hospital business .
“ It ’ s a dangerous game , ” said John Schafer , who served for eight years as deputy commander for clinical operations at Reynolds Army Community Hospital at Fort Sill in Oklahoma . “ It is crazy that the military doesn ’ t say , hey , we are really good at outpatient medicine and this inpatient thing is out of our league . ”