Obamacare mandates that substitute teachers can not work more than 30 hours per week at the same district without being offered healthcare benefits . The Central Cambria School District is now faced with a serious dilemma- how they will deal with a teacher ’ s absence when a regular teacher can not work and when a substitute teacher is close to exceeding their 30 hour threshold . Lisa Urbassik , a 7th grade Language Arts teacher at the school district is worried about how the Obamacare rule will affect students . “ They ’ re ( substitute teachers ) going to have a limited number of days that they can work in each district . If you get a teacher that has to maybe be out sick for a whole week for some reason , then how are you going to have one sub in to cover that class , how are you going to have any sort of continuity for the students ? ” ... Joe Klezek , a long-term substitute teacher in the district , said that substitute teachers rely on substitute teaching to gain experience and eventually get hired on as permanent teachers . “ Pretty much all teachers had to pay their dues at some point , ” [ he said ] . The school employs a system called “ AESOP ” to ensure that substitute teachers do not exceed 30 hours a week . Substitute teachers have not been a problem for them in past years , they said .
Meanwhile , in Obamacare news ( via the Free Beacon ) : As Democrats have pushed for a minimum wage hike -- which would kill jobs and close off opportunities for entry-level workers by literally raising the cost of creating jobs -- Republicans have proposed reversing Obamacare 's effective reduction of the standard work week . The House passed a bill in April to restore the 40-hour work week vis-a-vis the ( twice delayed ) Obamacare employer mandate ; the Democrat-held Senate did n't consider the measure , which the White House threatened to veto . A recent rain-related grounds crew debacle at Chicago 's Wrigley Field was also blamed on Obamacare 's impact on hourly workers . The federal government is warning hundreds of thousands of Obamacare `` enrollees '' that they must submit additional information to verify their eligibility by the end of next month , or have their coverage voided . This is part of the ongoing mess created by the millions of `` data discrepancy '' issues that have dogged Obamacare 's mechanics . A substantial percentage of people touted as `` enrolled '' by the Obama administration never paid their initial premiums , and major insurers have reported significant attrition among customers who had been current with their payments . The administration has also denied a Freedom of Information Act ( FOIA ) request from the Associated Press regarding Healthcare.gov 's data security integrity . The nonpartisan Government Accountability Office released a report last month demonstrating that the federal health exchange enrolled 11 of the watchdog 's 12 fake consumers who sought to buy coverage online or over the phone . The Cook Political Report 's Amy Walter wrote an analysis last week confirming that despite some chest-thumping from Democrats , Obamacare is still a `` huge liability '' for the president 's party :
Obamacare remains a liability to Democrats this fall . It remains widely unpopular in southern red states where control of the Senate will be determined . It may not be the issue this cycle , but it is still a top negative for Democrats . Plus , the more unpopular the President , the more politically toxic any issue associated with him or his administration . One Republican consultant told me he ’ s calling this the “ O ” election : it is defined by views of Obama . And among Republicans and independents , those views aren ’ t positive .
Democratic Senator Mark Pryor began airing an ad this month that quasi-defends Obamacare -- which mentions neither that word , nor the law 's more official name , the Affordable Care Act . The spot ignores the thousands of Arkansans who 've lost their existing coverage under Obamacare ( `` anecdotes , '' sniffs the Senator ) , as well as the many consumers who are experiencing significant premium increases . Both outcomes represent major violations of promises repeated by the president and Sen. Pryor , who 's voted the Obama line 90 percent of the time . Out in Colorado , home to another contested Senate race , officials have announced thousands of new cancellations , bringing the state 's total to roughly 340,000 . Sen. Mark Udall 's ( D-CO ) office applied pressure to state officials to `` fix '' the politically-damaging numbers last fall . Udall 's opponent , Rep. Cory Gardner , is among the many Coloradans personally betrayed by Democrats ' false `` keep your plan '' assurances :
A recent Washington Examiner editorial rehearse s Obamacare 's ongoing problems and shattered promises , noting that a PriceWaterhouseCoopers analysis has concluded that rates will increase by an average of eight percent across Obamacare 's exchanges in 2015 , with consumers in many states facing double-digit spikes . This is not what people were told to expect . I 'll leave you with this little nugge t for US taxpayers :
If your income for 2014 is going to be higher than you estimated when you applied for health insurance , then complex connections between the health law and taxes can reduce or even eliminate your tax refund next year . Maybe you 're collecting more commissions in an improving economy . Or your spouse got a better job . It could trigger an unwelcome surprise . The danger is that as your income grows , you do n't qualify for as much of a tax credit . Any difference will come out of your tax refund , unless you have promptly reported the changes . Nearly 7 million households have gotten health insurance tax credits , and major tax preparation companies say most of those consumers appear to be unaware of the risk . `` More than a third of tax credit recipients will owe some money back , and ( that ) can lead to some pretty hefty repayment liabilities , '' said George Brandes , vice president for health care programs at Jackson Hewitt Tax Service .
The unhappy surprises associated with this law are nowhere near over .