HUALIEN COUNTY , Taiwan — Thirty years ago , before she dyed her hair pink to cover up the white , Dr. Huei-wen Tien came to Xiulin , a township on the east coast of Taiwan severed from the island ’ s urban centers by a formidable mountain range .
She had agreed to serve for 10 years in an aboriginal community in exchange for her medical education . Unconventional by nature — her motorcycle helmet says “ Punk ” — Tien says she wanted a challenge . She found one here , where about 15,000 people , mostly of the Taroko tribe , live near the lush gorges of a national park that shares their name .
Diabetes , alcoholism , and heart disease are common problems among the Taroko . The indigenous people have endured displacement , forced assimilation , and discrimination over the centuries . They are also poorer than the ethnically Han Chinese who make up most of Taiwan ’ s population .
But they never have to worry about one thing : their health care . In Taiwan , everybody is covered . The Taiwanese health care system is built on the belief that everyone deserves health care , in Xiulin just as much as anywhere else . The costs to patients are minimal . And the government has set up special programs to deliver care to the people in Xiulin and their neighbors in Hualien County .
On a warm October afternoon , in a government health clinic in the foothills of the Zhongyang ( Central ) Mountain Range , Tien saw an older Taroko woman she ’ s treated for decades . They have a comfortable rapport . The doctor teased the patient for her high blood sugar , asked what she had for breakfast , and insisted the woman take her diabetes medication that she skipped that morning . ( The woman said she was busy . )
Tien then inserted the woman ’ s national health insurance card into a chip reader to pull up her medical record on the computer . The cards are ubiquitous in Taiwan , the signature of its single-payer health care system , carried by everyone from the woman in Xiulin to a venture biotech executive I met in Taipei .
In the 1990s , Taiwan did what has long been considered impossible in the US : The island of 24 million people took a fractured and inequitable health care system and transformed it into something as close to Sen. Bernie Sanders ’ s vision of Medicare-for-all as anything in the world .
I came here last October to learn what it takes to set up and sustain such a system . It ’ s one of several stops around the globe that ███ made this past fall , in an effort to learn how other countries tried to achieve universal and affordable health care . Our project , Everybody Covered , was made possible by a grant from The Commonwealth Fund .
There ’ s clearly a need for lessons . Compared to the rest of the developed world , America spends more money on health care and produces worse outcomes . By one advanced metric — mortality for causes that should be avoidable with accessible , high-quality health care — the United States ranked last among the G7 countries in 2016 . America ’ s infant mortality rate is almost double that of some of its peers . Nearly one in 10 Americans lack insurance . People go bankrupt over medical bills . Yet Americans still spend about twice as much money on health care per capita as the average comparable country .
No health care system is perfect . But most of America ’ s economic peers have figured out a way to deliver truly universal coverage and quality care . The United States has not .
“ Canada and virtually all European and Asian developed nations have reached , decades ago , a political consensus to treat health care as a social good , ” health care economist Uwe Reinhardt wrote in his book Priced Out shortly before his death in 2017 . “ By contrast , we in the United States have never reached a politically dominant consensus on the issue . ”
Taiwan made its choice in the 1990s and embraced single-payer . It has required sacrifice : by doctors who believe they ’ re forced to see too many patients every day ; by patients with complex and costly conditions who can ’ t always access the latest treatments ; by citizens who have been asked from time to time , and will be asked again , to pay more for their health care than they did before .
The vast majority of Taiwan ’ s citizens today approve of their health care system . They know it isn ’ t a utopia . The country has made hard choices to keep this program sustainable , and it will need to do so again . That is what it takes to realize the single-payer dream .
Taiwan took a broken system and built a new national health insurance program
In the 1980s , Taiwan wasn ’ t yet a democracy , but the stirrings of popular rule could be felt . At the time , about 40 percent of Taiwanese people lacked health insurance — some people lost everything , even their house , if they had a medical crisis . Desperate to outflank reformers , the ruling government convened high-profile meetings to fix its health care system .
One guest at a 1989 conference was the German-born Reinhardt , a Princeton economist who was married to Taiwan-born scholar Tsung-Mei ( May ) Cheng .
Reinhardt , who later co-wrote the seminal paper “ It ’ s The Prices , Stupid ” about American health care and helped define the health policy debate in the US in the 2000s , was asked what system he thought Taiwan should adopt . He thought it over and talked about it with his wife for a couple of nights in their hotel room .
Everybody Covered What the US can learn from other countries ’ health systems Two sisters . Two different journeys through Australia ’ s health care system .
He finally delivered his answer : single-payer . One national health insurance plan , run by the government , covering everybody .
In Reinhardt ’ s view , single-payer would be the most equitable and efficient program . It was similar to systems already in place in Canada and the United Kingdom . He came up with the metaphor of the “ single pipe ” — through which all the money for health care would flow — to convey the concept to public officials .
It was a convincing presentation . As Cheng and her husband left to return to the United States , they didn ’ t know what would happen next . “ We went back to Princeton , ” Cheng recalls , “ and six months later , we were told the government would accept your recommendation to go single-payer . ”
The national government would eventually fast-track the implementation of the new system to 1995 , hoping to get the chaotic transition period over before the first popular elections in 1996 . There was plenty of skepticism leading up to it . Industry , experts , and the public alike doubted the program would succeed . Labor protesters threw paper money traditionally used in a funerary rite when the legislature passed the single-payer bill in 1994 . A majority of people in Taiwan disapproved of the single-payer plan when it took effect .
But the program ’ s reputation quickly improved once people started to enjoy its benefits . Approval has dipped ( when premiums were hiked in the 2000s ) and risen ( when the rural health care program that employs Tien in Xiulin was implemented ) over the years , but there has always been a solid baseline of support . Today , approval of the national health insurance program hovers near its all-time high , over 80 percent . The system endures 25 years after it was established .
Part of its appeal is its simplicity . Everybody in Taiwan is insured through the National Health Insurance Administration ( NHIA ) . They receive an ID card as proof of coverage , which also stores their medical records . The Taiwanese program runs with extraordinary efficiency : About 1 percent of its funding is spent on administration , according to a 2015 review by Cheng . ( Compare that to the US , where researchers have estimated that private insurers spend around 12 percent of overhead , and hospitals spend around 25 percent on administrative work . ) Experts say Taiwan ’ s advanced IT infrastructure deserves a good share of the credit .
The benefits are quite comprehensive : hospital care , primary care , prescription drugs , traditional Chinese medicine . Patients must make copays when they visit the doctor or fill a prescription or go to the ER , but they are generally low , 360 NTD ( about $ 12 ) or less . Lower-income patients are given an additional break on their cost-sharing obligations . Higher-income patients can take out private insurance for certain things not covered by the single-payer program .
The system is mostly funded by payroll-based premiums , with contributions from workers and their employers , supplemented by more progressive income taxes and tobacco and lottery levies . Premiums have been raised twice in the past 18 years to cover the growing cost of the program . The most recent rate increase in 2010 moved the payroll income tax rate from 4.55 percent to 5.17 , a 14 percent increase .
In the early 2000s , again at Reinhardt ’ s recommendation , Taiwan converted to global budgets to pay for health care as another cost-control measure . This means that every year , government officials and private providers sit across a table and negotiate rates for services , with an annual cap set on the total payments to hospitals and doctors that the government will make . Health spending has stayed flat in recent years as a percentage of GDP , and it is growing at a slower rate in Taiwan than in the United States .
Taiwanese patients use a lot of health care , and it puts a strain on providers
What it all adds up to is a system that patients seem broadly happy with — maybe too happy , according to doctors and economists I met .
“ I believe we are too kind to our patient [ s ] , ” says Shou-Hsia Cheng , a health economics professor at National Taiwan University ( NTU ) who has worked at NHIA on and off over the years , “ which is not a good thing , actually . ”
Taiwanese people take advantage of their cheap , accessible health care . The average number of physician visits per year ( 12.1 ) is nearly twice that of other developed economies . There was a dramatic spike in use after single-payer was passed : A 1997 JAMA research paper led by Shou-Hsia Cheng found that physician visits among the newly insured doubled in the first year of the program compared to the year before .
That has had predictable downsides : Hospitals get crowded in Taiwan . The capacity of health care providers to attend to everyone in need can be stretched pretty thin .
I visited the National Taiwan University Hospital , a red-brick building in the heart of Taipei from the Japanese colonial period , one weekday afternoon . All of the clinic lobbies were full . The registration desk , run take-a-number style , was bustling , beeps constantly pinging over the PA system as patients ’ numbers were called .
On another morning , inside a north-central Taipei primary care clinic , several patients were already sitting along the walls , hooked up to machines receiving infrared therapy for chronic pain , just a few minutes after the doors opened . The one doctor on site looked a bit frazzled as he showed me around before his clinic filled up any further .
The scenes bring to mind something I heard from trauma surgeon Li-Jian Chien , a member of the Taiwanese doctors union that formed in 2012 out of the frustrations felt in the medical profession .
In Taiwan , he says , “ the patient [ is ] in heaven ” — but “ the doctor is in hell . ”
It ’ s the opposite of the United States , he elaborates , where high cost sharing leads people to skip necessary care for serious conditions .
Chien says national health insurance with negligible cost sharing has pushed doctors to the brink . His friend and fellow physician Bing-Hong Lin exclaimed at one point during our interview : “ We are not the Avengers ! ”
Surveys conducted by the government show health care providers have rather mixed opinions on the single-payer system — a significant plurality , 43 percent , said they were “ neutral ” in 2018 — a sharp contrast to the public ’ s sky-high favorability .
Chien says he sometimes sees the same patient dozens of times every year in the emergency department where he works , often for problems that aren ’ t emergencies . The low costs mean patients have little incentive to avoid the ER .
“ Everyone wants to live forever , but it ’ s impossible , ” Chien says . “ Some people abuse emergency , abuse health care . ”
At the same time , because Taipei has a lot of traffic accidents , injured drivers and pedestrians come through his emergency department ’ s doors all the time . His attention is divided when it shouldn ’ t be .
Lin has started doing cosmetic medicine for adults on the side because he has become so frustrated by his pediatric practice . It ’ s a more lucrative field , paid for privately by patients , with a less demanding workload . His is not an uncommon choice , according to experts . Lin still bitterly remembers being called back early from leave he had taken in 2005 to attend his father ’ s funeral , because there was a staffing shortage at the hospital where he was doing his residency .
Taiwanese hospitals and clinics are understaffed compared to the rest of the world : There are about 1.7 doctors in Taiwan for every 1,000 patients , which is well below the average of 3.3 in other developed countries . There are especially shortages of specialists in less urbanized parts of the country .
“ Taiwan ’ s low ratios would be considered inadequate by OECD standards , ” Tsung-Mei Cheng wrote in 2015 , “ especially in view of the high utilization of health care services in Taiwan . ”
The country does excel at keeping wait times short for services like cataract and hip replacement surgeries . But providers are feeling the strain .
Taiwanese doctors work about 10 more hours a week on average than those in the United States . A 2016 survey of hospital physicians found that working overtime was prevalent , and doctors who worked a lot of overtime were more likely to say they might leave the hospital where they worked .
Crowded facilities , like the NTU Hospital , are the norm . Hospitals supplement their medical payments with high-margin non-health care services — food courts , parking , and so on — to keep themselves solvent .
The worry is that Taiwan ’ s national health insurance has given patients such a good deal on medical care that they are overwhelming the system .
Patients must make sacrifices , too , like when a drug is too expensive to cover
The patients have their own grievances . They ’ ve seen their premiums hiked and more taxes introduced over the past two decades , and they will probably be asked again soon to chip in more money .
And though the benefits are comprehensive for most people , Taiwan still doesn ’ t cover everything . Costly treatments for rare conditions are sometimes excluded .
A new drug for spinal muscular atrophy — a genetic disorder that progressively breaks down the patient ’ s muscle tissue , resulting in early death — came on the market in the US in 2017 . The first year of treatment costs $ 750,000 . Yi Jie Li , a 25-year-old woman with spinal atrophy and an outspoken advocate who wrote the 2017 book 7,300 Days : The Most Ordinary Luxury , penned a letter to the NHIA pleading with it to cover the drug for the patients it could help .
The department replied in a letter , and the president of Taiwan called her on the phone . They said they would do their best . But the drug still isn ’ t covered .
New medicines sometimes debut in Taiwan a full five years after they came on the market in the United States . For patients who need those medications , every day of waiting is a trial .
“ Now the medicine is there , ” Li says , “ but you can not use ” it .
In some rural parts of the country , medical understaffing means less access to specialists and pediatricians . High use has frustrated doctors in the cities , but it ’ s patients who suffer if it ’ s hard for them to see a doctor or nurse .
Even though Taiwanese patients get a good deal on health care , they don ’ t come across as entitled . Some of the patients I met , including those who have faced the gravest diagnoses , seem acutely aware of the trade-offs demanded of them to keep a single-payer system sustainable .
Gloria Lin was diagnosed with breast cancer shortly before national health insurance took effect ; today she is president of the Taiwanese Cancer Patient Association . Her group plays a part in talks between government and providers about what will be covered ( and for how much ) .
She told me that of course she wants to see every new cancer drug covered by the government plan . But she also understands why that ’ s impossible : The system would become too expensive .
“ We don ’ t want it [ to go ] bankrupt , ” she says . “ We have to work hand to hand together to solve the problem . … We have to be sensible for each other . ”
Sustaining a single-payer system requires hard choices for patients , providers , and taxpayers
National health insurance achieved what the Taiwanese government hoped it would . Everybody can afford health care . People are living longer , healthier lives . But the ever-growing cost of providing health care to everybody makes it challenging for the program to remain financially sustainable .
The government keeps having to ask doctors , hospitals , and patients to make sacrifices to keep single-payer running . That ’ s not usually a political winner . No elected official is running on a campaign of higher premiums and higher copays .
But it helps that national health insurance has proven so popular . People want to make it work because single-payer has clearly improved Taiwanese lives .
One metric tells the tale : a rating based on medically amenable mortality , which gives a sense of how often people die of causes for which medical interventions should be available . In 1990 , before Taiwan ’ s single-payer program was implemented , the country held a rating around 60 , far behind the United States ’ rating of 80 . In 2016 , Taiwan had nearly caught up with the US , topping 85 ; the US sat at 88 , trailing its socioeconomic peers in Europe .
There is no doubt that medical care in Taiwan is better under single-payer , though it improved from a much worse status quo than the American system .
Today , Americans die prematurely of heart disease and lung cancer at higher rates than the Taiwanese . People in Taiwan live a little longer in general , though there are populations that encounter early deaths from alcohol use and stroke , just as some disadvantaged groups do in the United States . Yet overall , Taiwan spends 6 percent of its GDP on health care , about a third of what the United States does .
There is no comparison between the Taiwanese system of yesteryear — a 40 percent uninsured rate and the risk of financial catastrophe — and the one that exists today .
In the early 2000s , with health spending growing too quickly , the national health insurance office decided to institute the global budgets , a set pool of money that would cover all the medical services in a given year . Hong-Jen Chang , then the NHIA director , remembers seeing his effigy being decapitated in protests by hospital supporters . The opposition was overwhelming , and he had to resign over that decision in 2004 . That was also shortly after the first premium increase was approved .
NHIA Director-General Dr. Po-Chang Lee told me that , after the presidential election this month , he would pitch the new government on increasing copayments so patients pay more out of pocket if they visit the doctor or hospital .
It may take more than that . Shou-Hsia Cheng , the NTU professor , predicted Taiwan would soon have to reevaluate its payments for end-of-life care . The country is currently debating how to expand long-term care for an aging population ; it ’ s not covered by the national health plan .
The financial crunch is coming . The NHIA , which ran surpluses for a while after the last round of rate increases , is now about to see its reserves run out .
“ Either we should increase the premium rate or increase the copayment , or we have to delete some coverage items , ” Chang , the former NHIA director , says . “ That will happen — not in two years , perhaps in 10 years . It will happen . ”
But in Taiwan , the need for premium increases or hospital budget caps isn ’ t considered an indictment of national health insurance , at least if approval ratings for the system are anything to go by . It ’ s part of the evolution of the system they have built . And because the underlying program is so popular , Taiwanese leaders are confident patients will be willing to do what ’ s needed to keep single-payer viable .
“ They will adjust , ” Cheng , the professor , says . “ I believe so . ”
Taiwan is realizing the dream of “ health care as a human right ”
Since the beginning , the debate in Taiwan has been about balancing the imperatives of equity and access that underpinned the national health insurance program . Perhaps there ’ s been no greater demonstration of that than seeing the health care system at work in the mountain township of Xiulin , where Tien was making her rounds .
A decade into the single-payer experiment , when Hong-Jen Chang was in charge of NHIA , health care access in places like Xiulin was still lacking . So he decided to start the rural care delivery program that covers Tien and her patients .
On the same day she treated the Taroko woman at her clinic , Tien ventured out to visit a bedridden stroke patient in his home and showed the same warmth , offering him a cheerful thumbs-up as she went through her exam . A few doors down , a diabetes patient with gout welcomed a nurse into his house , parakeets chirping at the front door , so she could take his blood sugar readings , something she does two or three times a week . Meanwhile , in the town hall , a pop-up Chinese medicine clinic was set up , and patients filed in to get acupuncture treatments .
Chang told me a health care delivery program like this was the natural endpoint for the single-payer experiment , a necessary extension of its services to reach a vulnerable population . Without it , the work of Taiwanese health reform would always be incomplete .
“ That ’ s the essence of universal health coverage , ” he says . “ The principle of health [ as a ] human right is that everybody regardless of geography , religion , gender , age should have the right to access . ”
The people here seem grateful . Wong Shin-Fa , a 63-year-old Taroko man , stopped me on the side of the road in Xiulin and asked me what I was doing there . When I said I was an American reporting on health care , he told me a story .
He had a Taroko friend in Los Angeles who broke his arm , he told me , with a government health worker interpreting . Rather than get it fixed in the United States , his friend decided to fly back to Taiwan and have it mended there because he said it would be cheaper .
Shin-Fa knew Tien and her shock of pink hair . He said she ’ s famous around those parts . He told me , “ The government takes good care of the Taroko people . ”
Ashley Pon is an editorial photographer based in Taipei , Taiwan .
The Everybody Covered project can be found at ███.com/covered . This series was made possible by a grant from The Commonwealth Fund . All content is editorially independent and produced by our journalists .