Wal-Mart Stores Inc. plans to eliminate health insurance coverage for some of its part-time U.S. employees in a move aimed at controlling rising healthcare costs of the nation 's largest private employer .
Wal-Mart told The Associated Press that starting Jan. 1 , it will no longer offer health insurance to employees who work less than an average of 30 hours a week . The move affects 30,000 employees , or about 5 percent of Wal-Mart 's total part-time workforce , but comes after the company already had scaled back the number of part-time workers who were eligible for health insurance coverage since 2011 .
The announcement follows similar decisions by Target , Home Depot and others to completely eliminate health insurance benefits for part-time employees . It also comes a day after Wal-Mart said it is teaming up with an online health insurance agency called DirectHealth.com to help customers shop for health insurance plans .
`` We had to make some tough decisions , '' Sally Welborn , Wal-Mart 's senior vice president of benefits , told The Associated Press .
Welborn said she did n't know how much Wal-Mart will save by dropping part-time employees , but added that the company will use a third-party organization to help part-time workers find insurance alternatives : `` We are trying to balance the needs of ( workers ) as well as the costs of ( workers ) as well as the cost to Wal-Mart . ''
The announcement comes after Wal-Mart said far more U.S. employees and their families are enrolling in its healthcare plans than it had expected following rollout of the Affordable Care Act , which requires big companies to offer coverage to employees working 30 hours or more a week or face a penalty . It also requires most Americans to have health insurance or pay a penalty .
Wal-Mart , which employs about 1.4 million full- and part-time U.S. workers , says about 1.2 million Wal-Mart workers and family members combined now participate in its healthcare plan .
And that has had an impact on Wal-Mart 's bottom line . Wal-Mart now expects the impact of higher healthcare costs to be about $ 500 million for the current fiscal year , or about $ 170 million higher than the original estimate of about $ 330 million that it gave in February .
But Wal-Mart is among the last of its peers to cut health insurance for some part-time workers . In 2013 , 62 percent of large retail chains did n't offer healthcare benefits to any of its part-time workers , according to Mercer , a global consulting company . That 's up from 56 percent in 2009 .
`` Retailers who offer part-time benefits are more of an exception than the rule , '' says Beth Umland , director of research for health and benefits at Mercer .
Wal-Mart has been scaling back eligibility for part-time workers over the past few years , though . In 2011 , Wal-Mart said it was cutting backing eligibility of its coverage of part-time workers working less than 24 hours a week . And then in 2013 , it announced a threshold of 30 hours or under .
Taking into account the latest move , Wal-Mart declined to say what percentage of total part-time workers will not have company-sponsored healthcare coverage starting next year .
Wal-Mart , like most big companies , also is increasing premiums , and out-of-pocket costs that employees pay , to counter rising healthcare costs . Wal-Mart told The Associated Press that it 's raising premiums for all of its full-time and part-time workers : For a basic plan , of which 40 percent of its workers are enrolled , the premiums will go up to $ 21.90 per pay period , up from $ 18.40 , starting Jan. 1 .
Wal-Mart employees and their dependents will pay slightly more out-of-pocket for their care next year because the retailer has lowered the percentage of the bill it will cover for doctor visits , tests , and other services to 75 percent from 80 percent after the deductible is paid . But Wal-Mart spokesman Randy Hargrove also noted that the company has n't changed the maximum amounts that people will have to pay out of pocket annually .
© Copyright 2019 The Associated Press . All rights reserved . This material may not be published , broadcast , rewritten or redistributed .