President Trump ’ s new budget envisions eviscerating Obamacare — but it also includes money to fund contentious payments to insurance companies next year , in a move that conservatives say will end up sustaining the struggling law .
The budget allocates billions of dollars for cost-sharing payments , or what Capitol Hill calls CSRs , which reimburse insurers who under the law must cover some poor customers ’ out-of-pocket health care costs .
Mr. Trump canceled the payments this fall . He derided them as “ bailouts ” and said Congress had never approved the money . Companies responded by jacking up their rates .
Now , though , the president is requesting that the cash be approved — angering conservative groups that see little reason for Mr. Trump and the Republican-led Congress to reverse a hard-won victory over Obamacare .
“ It is disappointing to see this administration proposing to restart the misguided practice of using taxpayer dollars to subsidize big insurers , ” said Tim Phillips , president of Americans for Prosperity , a conservative group backed by the Koch brothers .
The move is surprising not only because of Mr. Trump ’ s past criticism but also because the administration seems committed to trying to dismantle the 2010 Affordable Care Act piece by piece . His budget calls for even bigger changes such as replacing the law with block grants to states to come up with their own solutions .
That idea failed to garner enough support to clear the Senate last year , and Republican leaders in Congress say they are not eager to get burned by another repeal-and-replace debate .
Public polling suggests most Americans will hold Mr. Trump and congressional Republicans responsible for turbulence in the markets because they control all levers of political power in Washington .
Paying out the cost-sharing money could constrain premium increases , which could tamp down voter anger over sticker shock .
The Congressional Budget Office has estimated that the cost-sharing payments will be $ 9 billion each year for 2018 and 2019 .
However , it projects that the government would save $ 6 billion in 2018 and $ 14 billion in 2019 because taxpayers wouldn ’ t have to shell out as much in premium subsidies that chase higher rates that insurers set to make up for the loss of reimbursement .
Mr. Trump ’ s fiscal 2019 budget also includes $ 812 million for a risk corridor program that was supposed to limit insurers ’ losses and bolster their participation in web-based health care exchanges in the law ’ s early rounds .
Insurers that suffered losses were supposed to receive payments from better-performing companies , though a sicker-than-expected customer base created an imbalance , and Republican demands on a 2014 spending bill thwarted any attempts to make companies whole with taxpayer dollars .
Mr. Trump ’ s request for Obamacare stabilization money does not have the force of law . It ’ s a wish list that Congress can accept or discard as it draws in the lines of an omnibus spending bill in the coming weeks .
“ Including CSRs and risk corridors in the White House budget would only prop up the failing health care law . Obamacare was manipulated to put the profits of private health insurance companies ahead of taxpaying Americans , and it ’ s good that we have put an end to these bailout programs , ” Mr. Phillips said .
Sen. Marco Rubio , the Florida Republican who led the charge against risk-corridor payments under Mr. Obama , reminded people via Twitter last week that he has been fighting for years to make sure taxpayers aren ’ t on the hook for insurers ’ losses .
He said it would be unfair to bail out insurers when critical programs face budget cuts .
Some analysts questioned why the administration would include risk-corridor funding at this point , since many insurers have adjusted their rates to the cost of covering people five years into the Obamacare program .
“ This is really water under the bridge . Funding the risk corridor program at this point would cover prior losses that insurers had , but it wouldn ’ t in any meaningful way affect premiums going forward , ” said Larry Levitt , senior vice president for the Kaiser Family Foundation . “ And , some of the insurers that suffered losses aren ’ t even in the marketplaces anymore . ”
Mr. Levitt said there does appear to be a “ softening among Republicans around the idea of federal funding to stabilize the insurance market . ”
A separate form of risk mitigation , known as reinsurance , is gaining momentum , as Republican leaders settle on their spending plans .
Sen. Susan M. Collins , Maine Republican , and Sen. Bill Nelson , Florida Democrat , are pushing a bill that includes $ 5 billion over two years to subsidize extra-costly consumers in the marketplace .
The Trump administration recently hailed Alaska for setting up a state-based reinsurance program to reel in rates .
Ms. Collins even tied her support for the Republican tax cut bill to votes on the CSR payments and her reinsurance plan , saying it would mitigate premium increases because of the tax legislation repeal of the individual mandate to hold insurance .
House Republican moderates are warming to the idea of reinsurance . Rep. Ryan A. Costello , Pennsylvania Republican , has presented a plan for $ 10 billion .
House aides said Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Greg Walden , Oregon Republican , has been working with Sen. Lamar Alexander , Tennessee Republican and chairman of the Senate Health , Education , Labor and Pensions Committee , and Ms. Collins and Mr. Costello on reconciling the measures so they can bring down premiums in the coming years .