Last week was rough for the GOP . The Senate Republican health care push failed when Sens . John McCain ( R-AZ ) , Lisa Murkowski ( R-AK ) , and Susan Collins ( R-ME ) joined Senate Democrats to block the so-called “ skinny repeal. ” Everything was set . House Republicans had agreed to bring this legislation to conference , instead of passing it , should the Senate succeed in getting 51 votes in the very early morning hours last Friday . It ended in disaster . Senate Majority Leader ( R-KY ) took to the floor when the bill failed , saying he looked forward to hearing ideas from Senate Democrats on health care , and that we should move on from health care . The bill is technically not dead , but for now it ’ s not on the agenda .
Congress is supposed to be in recess ; the House already adjourned without a plan to tackle the debt ceiling or other budgetary matters . Yet , the Senate remains in session . Sen. Joni Ernst ( R-IA ) has sent a letter to Sen. McConnell ’ s office , stringently reminding the Kentucky senator that the GOP can not simply back away from the repeal and replace pledge .
The impact Obamacare had on Iowa can not be understated . The state ’ s last Obamacare insurer , Medica , is mulling either pulling out of the market altogether or enacting a 43 percent premium hike . So , you can see the predicament here . Tax reform is another key item on the Trump agenda , but Republicans promised to repeal Obamacare for almost a decade . After falling short twice this year and to just say it ’ s time to move on is not acceptable , and it seems like Sen. Ernst knows that . Republican failure on health care is not an option , unless they want to give their conservative base to never vote Republican again . They invested money in candidates , canvassed neighborhoods , conducted phone banks , and scarified their weekends for these grassroots activities for nearly a decade . All they get is a “ well , we tried ” from Congress . That ’ s political suicide . Yet , as Guy wrote yesterday , GOP health care could be making a comeback on the action item list .