“ This is a values conversation and decision at a root level . How much do you want everybody to be treated the same ? ” says Linda Blumberg , a health policy expert at the Urban Institute . “ We have a structure that with its gaps and shortcomings can be built upon and improved . ”
For supporters , a key choice is whether to seek a “ single payer ” system that would centralize administration in the government , or to add a “ public option ” alongside other insurance plans . Some candidates say the first will be most efficient . Others support the second as a less-wrenching change , and as a system that can better leverage competition among providers .
Democratic presidential candidates are supporting various plans , often under the name “ Medicare for All. ” And they ’ re drawing energy from public opinion . Polls have found growing public concern about health care , as costs keep rising and the United States remains alone among advanced economies in lacking universal insurance .
American politicians have proposed universal coverage as far back as 1912 , when Theodore Roosevelt supported it during his unsuccessful third-party campaign to regain the presidency . Today , that goal is rising again .
When the House Rules Committee recently took up a controversial topic – shifting U.S. health care onto the shoulders of government as a “ single payer ” – the voice of one witness seemed loudest precisely because he had none . Due to illness , activist Ady Barkan was unable to speak to the committee . Instead his typed responses , delivered to the room by a monotone synthetic voice , told of his battles with insurance companies as he seeks both medical care and time with his wife and young son .
“ If I couldn ’ t use GoFundMe , I would probably start by asking my parents to start spending down their retirement savings , then we would go hat in hand to friends . Nobody dealing with a serious illness should have to do either of these things , ” he said . “ We should instead have a rational , fair , comprehensive social safety net that actually catches us when we fall . ”
At the April 30 hearing , Mr. Barkan was among several witnesses and lawmakers who urged the case for a single-payer system .
It would be a radical break from the status quo . Supporters say that ’ s exactly the point , after what they see as years of inaction and half measures , and with more than 27 million Americans lacking health insurance . Critics say there are reasons this idea hasn ’ t flown in the United States before and why it shouldn ’ t fly now .
But look beneath the surface of the “ Medicare for All ” debate , and the real story may be about the revival of a basic ideal : the goal of universal health insurance – whether it ’ s called a human right , as Mr. Barkan and some Democratic presidential candidates do , or is just something that a rich nation can afford for its citizens .
The goal is neither new nor , historically , exclusive to the Democratic Party . In a 2015 Harris poll , 84 % of Americans agreed it ’ s “ a moral issue ” to have “ a system that ensures that sick people get the care they need. ” That included 75 % of Republicans .
Yet for many , that view doesn ’ t automatically mean the government should be the sole buyer of insurance . Even among Democratic voters , there are concerns about how to both control costs and avoid rationing of care in such a system .
“ All the candidates are interested in improving affordability and access [ to health care ] relative to what we have today , ” says Linda Blumberg , an expert on health policy at the Urban Institute in Washington . But “ we ’ re a pretty incremental country . We don ’ t move too fast . We don ’ t like disruption , and we generally don ’ t like to be told what to do . ”
Driving the discussion : Health care has risen in importance for voters in recent years , judging by exit polls of voters after they cast ballots . A key reason is financial , with the cost of health care continuing to rise as a share of household budgets .
For many , it ’ s also that , even as “ Obamacare ” has grown more accepted as a vehicle for expanding access to care , Republicans have sought to repeal it without having a clear replacement plan .
“ The attempt to repeal the Affordable Care Act really scared the American people , ” says Topher Spiro , a health-policy specialist at the liberal Center for American Progress in Washington . “ When you try to take something away , it tends to be highly motivating . ”
Support for a single-payer system seems to have risen over the past year or so . Yet , even as the issue galvanizes the political left , Democratic candidates and lawmakers are far from united over what Medicare for All means .
To some people , this means making a government health plan the only one available – a true single-payer system with the advantages of universal coverage and economies of scale . Supporters say costs for care would fall as government uses its leverage to set lower prices with doctors and hospitals .
Critics worry that costs would instead rise as the government seeks to provide more benefits to more people .
This pros-and-cons debate – outlined both in a report that Ms. Blumberg co-authored and in a Congressional Budget Office analysis – has erupted along partisan lines , as Republicans question the ability of government to vastly expand its role over a sector that currently represents nearly one-fifth of U.S. economic activity .
“ I would say that anybody believes that a government-run health care system provides better health care at lower prices , I got some land that ’ s underwater I need to sell you for high-rise condos , ” Rep. Ralph Norman , a Republican from South Carolina , said on May 22 at a second House hearing on the issue .
But also at that hearing , Democratic Rep. Pramila Jayapal of Washington state noted that nations with single-payer systems provide universal coverage while spending less on health care than the U.S. does .
Until Republicans offer a rival plan of their own , the big battle is really among Democrats themselves . Some presidential contenders argue that the goal of universal coverage can be better attained with less radical change , such as creating a “ public option . ”
In fact , while the U.S. stands alone among advanced economies in not offering universal coverage , the models in those other nations are varied and far from one-size-fits-all . That idea may resonate with Americans who tend to value choices – whether of doctors , of insurance plans , or of approaches to care , such as for conditions that may have no known medical cure .
Polls suggest that many Americans do n't want their employer-based plans – or the current version of Medicare – to disappear .
“ One doesn ’ t necessarily have to go to a single-payer system , ” says Sara Collins , an expert at the Commonwealth Fund in New York , which supports the goal of universal coverage . “ One can build on the current system . I think the overall [ public ] concern is what people are paying , and the fact that millions of people are still uninsured . ”
Rep. Seth Moulton , a Massachusetts Democrat , is among the presidential candidates endorsing the idea of a public option competing with private insurance offerings .
“ I ’ ve seen the good , the bad , and the ugly of single-payer health care , ” said Mr. Moulton , who as a military veteran has relied on Veterans Affairs hospitals . While praising the VA for negotiating lower prescription drug prices , he described challenges such as veterans waiting for care or having their records mixed up .
“ Competition is good , ” he said . “ And just like we have options for delivering packages , I think we should have options for delivering health care . ”
A trend of consolidation in the industry has left many hospitals as near-monopolies in areas they serve . Some experts see the current high costs in the U.S. as an inherently vexing challenge , no matter what path the nation takes .
For instance , if policymakers tried to extend current Medicare pricing to all Americans , that would be asking hospitals to take an instant pay cut , since Medicare currently doesn ’ t pay them as much as private insurers do .
“ I think there would probably be almost immediate tremendous pressure ” upward on prices , says Ed Dolan , an economist at the Niskanen Center , a free-market-oriented think tank in Washington .
Pointing to the Netherlands , which blends taxpayer funding with competing private insurance providers , he says “ it seems a lot easier to move the American system into that model ” than to migrate toward a more government-centered system such as Britain ’ s .
Whatever the details , some advocates say what ’ s most vital is that Americans shouldn ’ t have to worry about going without health care , or about facing financially ruinous choices .
American politicians have proposed universal coverage as far back as 1912 , when former President Theodore Roosevelt supported it as part of his unsuccessful third-party campaign for the White House .
Congress sought to move toward that goal by creating Medicare for the elderly and Medicaid for low-income Americans in the 1960s . The Affordable Care Act in 2010 marked a major step beyond that , expanding Medicaid and setting up marketplaces for other Americans to shop for plans with government subsidies .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
Ms. Blumberg at the Urban Institute welcomes the way the Democratic presidential campaign promises to nudge candidates toward more detailed proposals , and perhaps toward answers on some of the tough challenges .
“ This is a values conversation and decision at a root level . How much do you want everybody to be treated the same ? ” Ms. Blumberg says . And she adds : “ We have a structure that with its gaps and shortcomings can be built upon and improved . ”