As governors from around the country meet this weekend in Williamsburg , Va. , health care is near the top of their agenda . Specifically , what to do about the federal health law , now that the Supreme Court has given states new options .
Republican governors in particular said they were genuinely surprised by the Supreme Court ruling . The justices declared the health law in general constitutional , but gave states the option of whether or not to dramatically expand their Medicaid programs . They 'll now get to choose whether to put most people who earn more than about $ 15,000 a year on the program or not .
`` I think a lot of us , certainly on the Republican side , believed it would be found unconstitutional . So I think it 's just added more confusion to the issue rather than settling the issue , '' said Utah Gov . Gary Herbert , `` and probably more impetus on the November election to really find out and sort out what the implications are going to be going forward . ''
Indeed , the meeting 's host , Virginia Gov . Bob McDonnell , said he was n't planning to say yet whether his state would expand its Medicaid program , even with the federal government picking up the vast majority of the costs .
`` Honestly , I do n't think it 's responsible fully for my state to make a decision now because there 's still more information we need , '' he said .
Many Democratic governors see things differently , however , including Delaware 's Jack Markell , the incoming chairman of the National Governors Association .
`` This is not political . This is a financial analysis of what does it mean to cover , in our case , an additional 30,000 people , '' he said , `` and my view — and we 're clarifying that we 're understanding it all properly — ... is that this is absolutely a good deal for Delaware taxpayers . ''
Unlike Republicans , who say the Supreme Court decision confused matters , Democrats like Maryland 's Martin O'Malley also insisted that it should have ended the debate .
`` I think most governors understand that the Supreme Court 's decision was a final and clear ruling , '' he said .
Other Democrats were less charitable . Vermont 's Peter Shumlin said some of his Republican colleagues are n't being honest by calling for the repeal of the health law on the one hand , while declining to say whether they 'll accept the federal Medicaid funding that flows from it on the other .
`` Have a spine . The American people are sick and tired of spineless politicians . [ Either ] say , ' I believe the Affordable Care Act is the wrong thing , so I will not take the loot , ' or say , ' I believe the Affordable Care Act will help my state cover uninsured Americans , grow jobs , economic opportunities , and I 'm taking the loot , ' `` Shumlin said . `` But to say , ' I 'm gon na criticize the plan , but I wo n't tell you whether I 'm taking the loot or not until after the election , ' that 's what breeds cynicism among the American people . ''
O'Malley of Maryland thinks most of those Republican governors will eventually come around and take the money for economic — if not political — reasons .
`` Once the posturing of the election is past , I think that a lot of these governors are going to have a hard time going home to their doctors , nurses , hospitals and explaining to them why they are passing up an opportunity to transform these dollars into better economic uses for job creation in their states , '' he said .
But for many Republican governors , like Nebraska 's Dave Heineman , it 's about something bigger than parochial interests .
`` They all say it 's free federal money . No , it 's not . That 's our tax dollars , '' he says . `` It 's costing every one of us . ''
Behind the scenes at the meeting , however , governors did seem to agree on one thing . There are still lots of questions they want the federal government to answer about how they will all work together as the health law 's implementation proceeds .