Vice President-elect Mike Pence went to Capitol Hill to huddle with GOP leaders over Obamacare strategy .
`` The first order of business is to repeal and replace Obamacare , '' Pence told reporters .
Even the president made a rare visit to Capitol Hill to fire up his party to defend his signature health care law .
Democrats do n't have the votes to block a repeal , so they 're trying to rally public opinion . Their main charge is a repeal would lead to health care chaos .
`` They have no idea what to put in place of the ACA ( Affordable Care Act ) . For years they 've talked about repeal , but for five years now they 've had nothing to put in its place , '' charged Sen. Chuck Schumer , D-N.Y .
But House Speaker Paul Ryan , R-Wis. , refuted such charges , saying the GOP does have a plan to replace Obamacare .
`` We have a plan to replace it . We have plenty of ideas to replace it and you 'll see as the weeks and months unfold what we are talking about , '' Ryan told reporters .
`` Republicans must be careful in that the Dems own the failed Obamacare disaster , with its poor coverage and massive premium increase , like the 116 percent hike in Arizona . Also , deductibles are so high that is it practically useless . Do n't let the Schumer clowns out of this web , '' he tweeted .
Trump has also turned to social media to take on U.S. intelligence agencies .
He 's at odds with them over their investigation into the hacking of the Democratic National Committee emails . Trump supports WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange , who says Russia did not give him the stolen emails .
But many top intelligence officials disagree . And Democrats are warning Trump could face big-time payback .
`` Let me tell you , you take on the intelligence community , they have six ways from Sunday at getting back at you . So , even for a practical , supposedly hard-nosed businessman , he 's being really dumb to do this , '' said Schumer .
The Senate minority leader is also promising on MSNBC to fight Trump 's nominee to the Supreme Court .
`` If they do n't appoint someone who 's really good , we 're gon na oppose him tooth and nail , '' Schumer vowed .
Schumer also talked about fighting to simply leave that Supreme Court vacancy unfilled .
Just last year , he attacked Republicans for blocking a vote on Obama 's nominee to the high court , even though it was an election year , when Supreme Court votes usually do n't happen .
What 's clear is that Democrats are prepared to oppose Republicans on a variety of issues -- which could make Washington 's already divisive politics even worse in the months ahead .