Of all the comments from all the opportunists seeking to make political capital from a dying child , the most asinine , surely , comes from former US congressman Joe Walsh . The talk radio provocateur took to Twitter this week to ask : “ Why does an American need an AR-15 ? ” His answer : “ To make sure what ’ s happening to # AlfieEvans never happens here . That ’ s why. ” As an NHS palliative care doctor , I assume Walsh is advocating semi-automatic assault rifles to protect against people like me . As a mother , I can scarcely comprehend someone using a child ’ s plight to make a case for the weapons used in many of America ’ s bloodiest school shootings .
Alfie Evans ' parents to meet doctors to discuss taking child home Read more
Liverpool toddler Alfie Evans has spent most of his desperately short life reliant on mechanical ventilation in a neonatal intensive care unit . Born apparently healthy , he has never toddled and never will . A progressive neurodegenerative disorder has so corroded his brain that , in the words of high court judge , Mr Justice Hayden , a recent MRI scan shows “ a brain that had been almost entirely wiped out ” , leaving Alfie in a semi-vegetative state . The family division of the high court has rejected multiple legal challenges from Alfie ’ s parents , Tom Evans and Kate James , to prevent Alder Hey children ’ s hospital withdrawing Alfie ’ s treatment and to fly him to Bambino Gesù , a paediatric hospital in the Vatican . Accordingly , against parental wishes , Alfie has now been detached from his ventilator , with palliative care plans in place to ensure his comfort .
Rarely do doctors ’ and parents ’ wishes misalign so catastrophically that the courts are required to resolve what form of medical management is in a child ’ s best interests . Usually – even amid all the anguish and heartbreak of paediatric terminal illness – both clinicians and family come to recognise , however reluctantly , the point at which valiant efforts at saving life have instead become the prolongation of dying .
Yet giving up hope can be unbearably painful . I shall never forget a paediatric oncology colleague describing , blinded by his tears , how the mother of one of his young patients had thrown herself from the hospital roof , unable to endure the knowledge that her child ’ s cancer was terminal . I have held fathers as they collapse in my arms , seen a mother biting her own arm in her grief , and wondered , over and over , at the vastness of the pain this world can inflict on its youngest , most undeserving and innocent . Indeed , Mr Justice Hayden described this week “ a father whose grief is unbounded and whose sadness , as I have witnessed in this court , has an almost primal quality to it . ”
Withdrawal of care is neither killing nor murder , but enables a patient to die with comfort and dignity
The sheer rawness of anticipatory grief can obliterate reason . What helps , I have learned , in palliative medicine , is time , space , calm and quiet . Yet Alfie Evans ’ s parents have been surrounded this week , at Alder Hey , by a mob of supporters who attempted to storm the entrance of the hospital , terrifying other young patients and their parents . A wider army of armchair vigilantes have stoked the vitriol – and their own agendas – from the comfort of their sofas .
Alfie ’ s doctors , already subjected to death threats , have been described online as pursuing “ a court-ordered execution ” . Even the pope has weighed in , while former Arkansas governor , Mike Huckabee , has commented that “ Brits have decided some kids just aren ’ t worth that much and are disposable . ”
And from former presidential potential nominee Ted Cruz , there was this . “ It is a grim reminder that systems of socialized medicine like the National Health Service ( NHS ) vest the state with power over human lives , transforming citizens into subjects . ”
In fact – to my enormous pride – the NHS has kept Alfie alive for nearly two years , at no cost to his family , and without any judgments concerning the value of his life . But intensive care is only ever a temporary support for failing organs while a reversible pathology is treated . In Alfie ’ s case , multiple doctors from multiple countries have all agreed that his illness is irreversible , progressive and terminal . Withdrawal of care is therefore neither killing nor murder , but enables him to die with comfort and dignity .
To witness powerful media , political and religious voices deploying grossly inflammatory and misleading rhetoric at the expense of a child is grotesque . Misuse of words is the antithesis of everything we strive , as doctors , to do for our patients . Clear , empathic communication can heal , build trust , assuage fears , instil hope – and help a patient and their family come to terms with the unavoidable . Capitalising on a family ’ s grief is none of the above : it is simply – and inexcusably – exploitative . May Alfie Evans rest in peace .