Obama ’ s deepening engagement stands in contrast to his past treatment of the law . W.H . prepares for Obamacare push
Three years after signing Obamacare into law , President Barack Obama finally looks eager to talk about it .
The White House is mapping out a strategy to deploy the president , First Lady Michelle Obama , Vice President Joe Biden and Jill Biden in what will be their most coordinated effort yet to sell Obamacare , senior administration officials said .
A burst of activity will coincide with the October opening of the insurance marketplaces , but the West Wing views this next phase as something more akin to a political campaign ’ s push for early votes . Over the six-month enrollment period , the White House will use the Obamas and Bidens strategically , tracking the turnout for the exchanges in key states and sending them into weak markets to boost numbers .
Obama ’ s deepening engagement stands in contrast to his arms-length treatment of the law since the legislative fight , bruising and endless , drew to a close in 2010 . He moved onto other priorities — and only rarely , if not reluctantly , looked back .
But in the last month alone , Obama has plugged the new health benefits on “ The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , ” convened a videoconference with state health officials from the Situation Room , devoted a weekly address to the law and tweeted about it with Katy Perry , who boasts 41 million followers .
Capitalizing on the March on Washington this week , Obama and top administration officials courted leaders of the African-American community , which has the highest uninsured rate of any demographic . And on Thursday night , he touted Obamacare in a recorded video message at MegaFest , a faith-based conference in Dallas organized by megachurch pastor T.D . Jakes .
The increased involvement comes at an obvious juncture , as the unpopular law enters prime time . But it also signals the stakes for Obama : It ’ s his best opportunity to prove critics wrong and begin turning around public opinion if the rollout can beat expectations , which the president is already trying to downplay with his refrain that Obamacare won ’ t be the first flawless enterprise in human history .
“ Check it out , find out what ’ s right , sign up preliminarily and then actually go ahead and get that insurance starting on October 1st , ” Obama said in an interview aired Thursday on the Yolanda Adams Morning Show . “ And so we ’ re just going to keep on providing people with information , pumping this up . ”
It ’ s the first day to sign up for health care — and a major milestone for Obama ’ s signature domestic achievement — but he isn ’ t likely to mark what aides describe as an arbitrary benchmark , even though he ’ s emphasized the date in his recent interviews .
Government funding runs dry that day , raising the possibility that congressional gridlock could force in a shutdown , so the White House wants to keep his schedule open .
There will be an coordinated push , with events by advocacy groups and tweets from celebrities , but aides said they ’ re reluctant to over-hype the first day . Glitches and problems are likely . At least one state , Oregon , has delayed opening its exchanges until mid-October . And the actual coverage doesn ’ t begin until Jan. 1 .
In recent months , Obama has not only focused on the law more often in public . The implementation has consumed an increasing share of his attention behind closed doors .
Obama packs health policy aides into the Roosevelt Room at the White House every month , pressing them for more than an hour at a time on latest on Obamacare implementation .