Much is being made of Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel ’ s essay in The Atlantic , “ Why I Hope to Die at 75 , ” where he argues that dying at 75 would be best for everyone . He ’ s entitled to his opinion , of course , but what makes this especially concerning is his role as an architect of the so-called “ Affordable Care Act ” ( Obamacare ) , his position as director of the Clinical Bioethics Department at the U.S. National Institutes of Health and his close relationship with President Obama as an adviser on health issues .
When you ’ re even one of those things , let alone all three , nothing you say or write in public on the issue you ’ re charged with is personal .
The ensuing debate has understandably centered on the craven notion that individuals over the age of 75 are somehow not as viable or worthy as those who are younger . In fact , Dr. Emanuel makes that point specifically : “ We are no longer remembered as vibrant and engaged , but as feeble , ineffectual , even pathetic . ”
There are innumerable examples , of course , of older individuals , well-known and the undiscovered , who live full and impactful lives well into their 90s and even 100s . President Reagan ’ s Brandenburg speech ( “ Tear down this wall. ” ) was delivered when he was 76 . The author Ray Bradbury , wrote every day through his 80s , until his death at 91 .
Kimani Maruge of Kenya is the oldest person to attend primary school , enrolling in the 1st grade at 84 . A 96-year-old , Mohr Keet , is the world ’ s oldest bungee jumper . And at 77 years old , Minoru Saito , is the oldest to circumnavigate the globe . Just this month , 91-year-old Henry Kissinger , Nobel Peace Prize winner and former secretary of state , just released his 17th major work , “ World Order . ”
Focusing on this aspect of vitality at every age , while compelling , is a mistake . While presented by Dr. Emanuel as his personal intention to die at 75 , this is , in fact , a message for all Americans . His goal is to plant the seed that limiting our lifetimes should be a serious consideration in itself , and weaved into our own health care decisions .
Why ? Because being older is an expensive proposition , especially if the government is paying the bill .
In the context of Obamacare , this is the beginning of a conditioning of older Americans and their families to accept the notion that if you have a chronic disease or an injury or weakness that ’ s expensive to treat , and you ’ re 75 or older , perhaps the less-expensive hospice is the better option .
Supporters of Obamacare strike back at the idea that Dr. Emanuel would approve of “ death panels ” or even rationing general health care . His supporters point to the fact that he has written a great deal about being against euthanasia , which is the direct involvement of doctors or a medical system in causing a patient ’ s death .
Perhaps Dr. Emanuel expects that position to cloud the truth of what he suggests now , which is still the facilitating of a patient ’ s death without a physician or medical professional acting in a proactive way . Instead , limiting or denying certain health care to patients , promising “ comfort ” as one dies , protects the system from the repugnance of active “ euthanasia . ”
His dance around the difference ? “ Once I have lived to 75 , my approach to my health care will completely change . I won ’ t actively end my life . But I won ’ t try to prolong it , either , ” he declares in the essay .
Welcome to Obamacare and single-payer . Just change the personal pronouns and you ’ ve got the template for “ end-of-life ” counseling , with the patient providing their own personal death panel .
Most older Americans , of course , reject the notion that dying is their duty . Dr. Emanuel ’ s message , therefore , is also for family caretakers , those who also need to be convinced that it ’ s best for Mom to not get that pacemaker because , after all , she ’ s 75 already , and isn ’ t that long enough ?
In his article , and as a message to everyone in a family with someone 75 or older , Dr. Emanuel insists health care for the older among us is a waste of precious health care resources . Part of his commitment to some larger notion ( read single-payer , government-delivered health care ) is a personal refusal of medical care . For him , he says , no cancer treatment after 75 , no flu shots , no colonoscopies ( starting at 65 ) , no prostate-cancer screening , no pacemaker and no antibiotics , because , he assures us , “ death from infections is quick and relatively painless . ”
Apparently , we are supposed to believe that Dr. Emanuel decided his personal point of view on life and death has nothing to do with everyone else , and is simply be something the American people needed to know . That ’ s how much contempt the left has for your grasp of reality .
Considering his position and influence at the federal level , it strains credulity to suggest that this attitude is not attached to the continuation of his work for the Obama administration , and its desired outcome .
This ‘ Die on Schedule ’ mentality , of course , is an obscenity meant only for the Little People . Those planning to sweep you off to that quiet good night will no doubt exempt themselves . Again .
Tammy Bruce is a radio talk-show host , author and Fox News contributor .