Voters think ObamaCare is going to hurt their wallet and over half want the law repealed , according to a new ███ national poll .
By a large 47-11 percent margin , voters expect the 2010 health care law will cost them rather than save them money in the coming year . Another 34 percent think the law won ’ t change their family ’ s health care costs .
Those negative expectations come at a time when a majority of the public remains unhappy with the way thing are going in the country ( 63 percent dissatisfied ) , and over half say they haven ’ t seen any signs the economy has started to turn the corner ( 57 percent ) .
Republicans are three times as likely as Democrats to think ObamaCare will cost them money over the next year ( 70 percent vs. 23 percent ) . One Democrat in five expects the law will result in savings for their family ( 21 percent ) .
The poll asks people to take an up-or-down vote on ObamaCare : 40 percent say they would vote to keep the law in place , while just over half -- 53 percent -- would repeal it .
Over half of those under age 45 ( 51 percent ) as well as those 45 and over ( 56 percent ) would vote to repeal ObamaCare .
Most Republicans want the law repealed ( by 85-13 percent ) and so do independents ( by 65-25 percent ) . Most Democrats favor keeping ObamaCare ( by 72-21 percent ) .
On July 2 , the White House announced it was delaying implementation of some key provisions of the health care law because it had determined reporting requirements were too complex . Some lawmakers charged this was an abuse of executive discretion under the Constitution and criticized the president for sidestepping Congress . The reaction from voters is mixed : 45 percent say Obama ’ s actions are “ unacceptable , ” while 46 percent say “ it ’ s no big deal . ”
Majorities of Republicans ( 68 percent ) and independents ( 55 percent ) think Obama delaying parts of the law is unacceptable , while most Democrats say it ’ s no big deal ( 71 percent ) .
One provision of the law that has already gone into effect is the “ Medical Loss Ratio ” provision . It is expected to result in millions of Americans receiving rebate checks from their insurance companies for unspent premiums . The first checks went out last year , and another batch is going out this summer . Even so , only eight percent of voters say ObamaCare has saved them money since it was implemented .
The ███ poll is based on landline and cell phone interviews with 1,017 randomly chosen registered voters nationwide and was conducted under the joint direction of Anderson Robbins Research ( D ) and Shaw & Company Research ( R ) from July 21 to July 23 . The full poll has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points .