A new multi-state lawsuit has been announced to stop President Trump from halting key ObamaCare payments to insurers .
Eighteen states and Washington , D.C. , signed onto the lawsuit filed Friday in federal court in California , according to Sarah Lovenheim , a spokeswoman for California Attorney General Xavier Becerra Xavier BecerraFeds wo n't pursue charges against Sacramento officers who fatally shot Stephon Clark Overnight Energy : 17 states sue Trump over weakening of Endangered Species Act | Federal land agency chief releases 17-page recusal list | UN climate report warns of warming oceans , sea level rise 17 states sue Trump administration over weakening of Endangered Species Act MORE ( D ) .
On Thursday night , Trump announced he would stop making the payments , which led to an outcry from critics saying he was sabotaging the health-care law .
The complaint will seek a temporary restraining order , preliminary injunction and permanent injunction requiring the cost-sharing reduction payments be made .
I am prepared to sue the # Trump Administration to protect # health subsidies , just as when we successfully intervened in # HousevPrice ! — Xavier Becerra ( @ AGBecerra ) October 12 , 2017
NOW LIVE : I 'm announcing a new lawsuit to protect NYers ' & all Americans ' access to quality , affordable healthcare : https : //t.co/6BBDxNihUP pic.twitter.com/HeXXAXJYd8 — Eric Schneiderman ( @ AGSchneiderman ) October 13 , 2017
The administration , on a monthly basis , had been funding cost-sharing reduction subsidies , which compensate insurers for lowering the out-of-pocket costs of certain ObamaCare enrollees .
Trump has repeatedly signaled he might cut them off , while insurers have been pleading for long-term certainty that they would continue .
`` Without the Affordable Care Act [ ACA ] and its subsidies for these families , millions more would be left in the cold without coverage . California is n't about to turn its back on hardworking families who are fighting to hold onto their ACA health insurance . We 've taken the Trump administration to court before and won , and we 're ready to do it again if necessary , ” Becerra said in a statement Thursday night , before the lawsuit was officially announced .
Additionally , New York Attorney General Eric Schneiderman ( D ) said he anticipates proceeding with litigation on a case that ’ s currently been on hold .
The House sued the Obama administration , arguing the White House was illegally funding cost-sharing reduction subsidies payments to insurers .
Earlier this summer , the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled that a coalition of attorneys general — including Schneiderman and Becerra — can defend the payments .
“ The fast track for initial relief will be in the case we ’ re filing in California , ” Schneiderman said , referring to the new lawsuit .