If you get health insurance on the job , chances are it cost more again this year .
Annual family health insurance premiums rose about 4 percent to $ 15,745 in 2012 , according to the latest survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust .
Now that 's a fairly modest increase by historical standards , and well down from last year 's 9 percent . Still , it 's more than double the 1.7 percent increase in average wages and way above the 2.3 percent rate of general inflation this year .
`` In terms of employee insurance costs , this year 's 4 percent increase qualifies as a good year , but it still takes a growing bit out of middle-class workers ' wages , which have been flat or falling in real terms , '' said Kaiser President and CEO Drew Altman .
Why the slowdown ? One big reason may lie in a general decline in health care use . As the economy sputtered , people tended to be more reluctant to use health care services . At the same time , employers passed more of the costs to workers — in the form of higher premium and cost sharing , making them more reluctant still .
One new finding in this year 's survey is that firms that employ mostly lower-wage workers ( those earning $ 24,000 annually or less ) are more likely to offer coverage with high deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs than firms that have mostly higher-paid ( more than $ 55,000 annually ) workers . At the firms with many lower-paid workers , 44 percent of those with coverage face an annual deductible of $ 1,000 or more , compared to only 29 percent of those at higher-paying firms .
As Heard On Morning Edition Health Care Survey : Health Premiums Rise By Small Percentage Survey : Health Premiums Rise By Small Percentage Listen · 2:31 2:31
Given that the survey comes in the midst of a presidential election campaign , the natural question will be what impact President Obama 's Affordable Care Act has had on the better-than-expected results .
`` We 're still waiting for a lot of the important provisions to take effect for small firms , '' said Kaiser 's Gary Claxton . That wo n't happen until 2014 .
That did n't stop opponents of the law , however , from blaming it for the increases — or rather , blaming it for not stopping the increases altogether .
`` Candidate Obama said repeatedly his bill would CUT premiums by an average of $ 2,500 per family — meaning premiums would go DOWN , not merely just 'go up by less than projected . ' The campaign also promised that that those reductions would occur within Obama 's first term , '' said a release from the Republican staff of the Joint Economic Committee .
But the survey did point out at least one clear — and popular — result of one of the health law 's early benefits . It found 2.9 million young adults ( up to age 26 ) are currently covered on their parents ' plans who otherwise would n't have employer coverage . That 's up from 2.3 million a year earlier .