Within months of Democrats ramming through Obamacare without a single Republican vote , the American people responded , pummeling the president 's party at the polls . Republicans gained 63 seats in the House , six United States Senators , six governorships , and nearly 700 seats in state legislatures nationwide . Conservatives had their temporary political revenge , we were told , but Democrats would get the last laugh because Obamacare was sure to become more popular once Republicans ' scurrilous smears against the law were shown to be false . How 's that working out ?
Democratic senators , at a caucus meeting with White House officials , expressed concerns on Thursday about how the Obama administration was carrying out the health care law they adopted three years ago . Democrats in both houses of Congress said some members of their party were getting nervous that they could pay a political price if the rollout of the law was messy or if premiums went up significantly . President Obama ’ s new chief of staff , Denis R. McDonough , fielded questions on the issue for more than an hour at a lunch with Democratic senators . Senator Jeanne Shaheen , Democrat of New Hampshire , who is up for re-election next year , said , “ We are hearing from a lot of small businesses in New Hampshire that do not know how to comply with the law. ” In addition , Mrs. Shaheen said , “ restaurants that employ people for about 30 hours a week are trying to figure out whether it would be in their interest to reduce the hours ” of those workers , so the restaurants could avoid the law ’ s requirement to offer health coverage to full-time employees . The White House officials “ acknowledged that these are real concerns , and that we ’ ve got to do more to address them , ” Mrs. Shaheen said . Senator Tom Harkin , Democrat of Iowa and chairman of the appropriations subcommittee on health care , said he was extremely upset with Mr. Obama ’ s decision to take money from public health prevention programs and use it to publicize the new law , which creates insurance marketplaces in every state .
Obamacare is impossibly complicated to comply with , is impeding hiring , and is causing businesses to lay off workers and cut back on other employees ' hours ? Why , who could have possibly seen that coming ? Oh , that 's right -- every single critic of Obamacare could . And did . Back to the grumbling Democrats :
Senator Benjamin L. Cardin , Democrat of Maryland , said he told White House officials on Thursday that he was concerned about big rate increases being sought by the largest health insurer in his state . The company , CareFirst BlueCross BlueShield , has sought increases averaging 25 percent for individual insurance policies that will be sold in the state insurance exchange , and it is seeking increases of about 15 percent for small businesses . The company said the higher premiums reflected costs of complying with the new law .
Obamacare is hiking up people 's premiums ? Why , who could have possibly ... Katie noted last week that other Hill Democrats are nervously conceding that the , ahem , `` Affordable Care Act '' does n't actually contain costs either . Shocking , I know . The Left is spooked because the law they force-fed the American people is shaping up to be a `` train wreck '' and a `` third world experience , '' to quote the law 's chief author and administrator , respectively . And now the more problematic elements of the president 's top legislative `` accomplishment '' are slated to roll out next year ; the supposedly popular bits were front-loaded for political reasons . ( And how is that going thus far ? Let 's ask a bunch of people with pre-existing conditions for their verdict ) . Obamacare remains unpopular , and Democrats are grappling with growing fears that a 2010-style backlash may befall them in 2014 , when the law they advertised as a legislative panacea is exposed as an unaffordable , unwieldy , logistical headache -- all in real time .
UPDATE - Politico describes `` Obamacare fires flaring up all over , '' and Fox 's Chris Stirewalt highlights a problematic and impending Medicaid assessment deadline the administration is poised to miss .