Tuesday night 's win in the presidential contest for President Obama was a win for ObamaCare , the president 's signature legislation from his first term . ObamaCare will now continue to be implemented .
This future means that we will continue to be faced with rising insurance premiums , as our current insurance expands to cover all patients regardless of pre-existing condition , age , or how many times they 've already used the policy .
Insurance will continue to follow a one-size-fits all model , where it is easy to overuse but may not cover our latest expensive technology which offer more personalized solutions .
Federal regulations in the form of Medicare 's Independent Payment Advisory Board as well as ObamaCare 's many other committees will restrict my choices for my patients . I will have more patients with more red tape and less time to spend with them .
Since ObamaCare does not effectively address the doctor shortage , you will see more nurse practitioners and physicians assistants , who are quite competent , but have different training than I have treating patients .
My patients who gain a new insurance card may find that it does n't buy them the care they were expecting .
Medical care will be shifted more and more to the hospital and medical center , which are more equipped to preserve their bottom line profits despite increasing federal regulations .
Accountable Care Organizations under the Affordable Care Act will focus more on quality of care as opposed to fee for service , which large groups and medical centers are more equipped to implement .
Doctors will cherry-pick their patients , staying away from those who are too sick to allow them to apply for financial incentives .
ObamaCare can only afford to extend health insurance entitlements to more people through increased taxes or penalties ( payroll tax for Medicare , individual and business mandates , tax on medical devices , etc . ) .
If the current economic climate continues , small businesses will be reluctant to add more employees and large businesses will prefer to pay the ObamaCare penalty than pay the increasing premiums .
More and more people will get their health insurances at the state exchanges , where taxes pay for federal stipends in states which have created their own exchanges .
There will be a disparity of services provided depending on your state . Medicaid expansion offered to 16 million more people will also vary depending on whether your state can afford to implement it or not . Medicaid lacks sufficient providers or networks to provide care , and the expansion makes this problem far worse .
President Obama 's victory on election night is not a victory for health care , though it may be a narrow one for health insurance companies who gain more customers .
Prices will continue to rise and access to actual care will decline in an already overcrowded system .
Biotech companies and drug companies may feel that the climate is no longer ripe for innovation .
Hospitals and other health care providers will continue to struggle amid shrinking reimbursements .
Bottom line : my patients who gain a new insurance card may find that it does n't buy them the care they were expecting .