After sidestepping the issue for weeks , President Obama on Thursday apologized to Americans who are losing their health insurance despite his repeated and emphatic promises that it wouldn ’ t happen .
The president made the admission on a day when Senate Republicans demanded that he fire his top health official in response to “ undeniable ” problems with Obamacare ’ s rollout and his White House fends off doubts that it can fix a balky website that is spoiling the health care law ’ s debut .
“ I am sorry that they are finding themselves in this situation based on assurances they got from me , ” the president told NBC in an interview recorded at the White House on Thursday afternoon . “ We ’ ve got to work hard to make sure that they know we hear them and we ’ re going to do everything we can to deal with folks who find themselves in a tough position as a consequence of this . ”
Mr. Obama ’ s comments represent something of an about-face for the administration , which until now had argued that Americans were aware all along — or should have been aware — that Obamacare would result in many people losing policies because they don ’ t comply with the law ’ s standards .
About 5 percent of Americans — 14 million people — have plans through the individual insurance market . As many as two-thirds of them could lose coverage because it does not comply with the president ’ s signature health care law . The situation has led to a backlash on Capitol Hill , with lawmakers on both sides of the aisle backing bills that would allow consumers to keep their coverage no matter what .
Some senators went further Thursday . Sen. Pat Roberts , Kansas Republican , and nine other lawmakers signed a letter that calls for Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius to lose her job over problems with the Affordable Care Act .
SEE ALSO : Fire her ! Ten Republican senators press Obama to boot Sebelius
“ Regrettably , these problems were diagnosed early and ignored , ” the senators wrote , citing inspector general reports from this year .
Compounding the turmoil , a bipartisan pair of senators followed through on a proposal to postpone the law ’ s individual mandate for one year in light of the roadblocks to coverage .
The mandate , which requires most Americans to have health insurance next year , was placed in the law to ensure that young , healthy consumers keep premiums in check when those with pre-existing conditions enroll because they no longer can be denied coverage .
“ Since the Affordable Care Act passed in 2010 , there have been many identifiable problems exposed in the law that need to be addressed , ” Sen. Joe Manchin III , West Virginia Democrat , said in filing the bill with Sen. Mark Kirk , Illinois Republican .
“ We ’ ve worked through a few of these issues , but our job in Congress is far from over . We need to start working together to fix this law and make it work so that all Americans have access to affordable and reliable health care coverage , ” the two men said .
The rising discontent on Capitol Hill and Mr. Obama ’ s apology capped a week when the president was massaging earlier statements by adding an “ if ” to his promise , offered more than 30 times over the past several years , that “ if you like your plan , you can keep your plan . ”
“ If you had one of these plans before the Affordable Care Act came into law and you really liked that plan , what we said was , ‘ You can keep it if it hasn ’ t changed since the law passed , ’ ” Mr. Obama said earlier in the week .
No previous public statements contained the caveat that plans must remain unchanged , but they often were spiked with such emphatics as “ period ” and “ no matter what. ” The Politifact fact-checking journalism site gave Mr. Obama ’ s statements a “ Pants on Fire ” rating .
Senate Democrats , several of whom face tough re-election battles next year in Republican-leaning states , are increasingly nervous about the rocky rollout of the law . The Affordable Care Act essentially belongs to their party because they passed it with no Republican votes in Congress , cheered it on for three years and helped precipitate a partial government shutdown last month by refusing Republican demands for a delay .
So far , none of them has called for Mrs. Sebelius to lose her job over the situation . Republicans have not been so shy .
Mr. Roberts — who knows Mrs. Sebelius personally from their shared home state of Kansas — and co-signers of his letter outlined a litany of problems with HealthCare.gov , a website that was supposed to connect residents of 36 states with health plans on the individual market but has frequently crashed since its Oct. 1 debut .
The online portal has struggled to transmit accurate reports to insurers , and doubts about the site ’ s technical safeguards have persisted despite the Obama administration ’ s pledge that the system is secure .
Mr. Obama has offered no indication he will oust Mrs. Sebelius . Instead , the administration says it is focused on making HealthCare.gov work for the “ vast majority ” of users by the end of the month .
Mrs. Sebelius , who said she is accountable for Obamacare ’ s rollout failures but refused to resign , will travel to Atlanta on Friday to promote Obamacare and meet with in-person assistants who are helping people enroll in health coverage . Her trip follows Mr. Obama ’ s jaunt to Texas on Wednesday to urge reluctant state officials to expand Medicaid enrollment to people making up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level .
Mrs. Sebelius is coming off a pair of bruising hearings on Capitol Hill , where she doubled down on the importance of the health care law for sick Americans who may gain insurance for the first time .
But Republican lawmakers say the reforms are fundamentally flawed . Millions of Americans are losing health care plans that do not meet minimum-coverage standards under Obamacare , and they can not explore alternatives if the online portals are not working .
These customers might be able to find better coverage at a better price under Obamacare ’ s exchanges , which offer income-based subsidies to defray premium costs , but they would have to sign up by Dec. 15 to have coverage before next year .
“ These people could be left without any insurance at all if the exchange systems are not working soon , ” Mr. Roberts and fellow lawmakers wrote .
Julie Bataille , spokeswoman for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid , said Thursday she thinks the website will run well enough by late this month to give consumers enough time to enroll . She also downplayed talk of extending Obamacare ’ s six-month enrollment period past March 31 .
“ That is certainly a long window of time for individuals to get information , get educated and make their plan selection by the end of March , ” she told reporters on a conference call .
CMS has until the end of business Friday to respond to a subpoena from House Ways and Means Committee Republicans that demands figures on how many people have enrolled so far under Obamacare , but the administration has said repeatedly that it will not release the data until “ mid-November . ”
A committee spokeswoman said Chairman Dave Camp , Michigan Republican , had not received anything as of Thursday afternoon .
White House spokesman Jay Carney said the subpoena appeared to be a political ploy designed to twist the knife over dismal enrollment .
“ If the purpose is to point out , which I ’ m sure it is , that enrollment numbers will be low for October — take it from me , they ’ ll be low in October , ” he said .