As problems continue at HealthCare.gov , President Obama has morphed into the world ’ s most powerful pitch man , hawking his signature domestic achievement to an increasingly skeptical population .
In his weekly address , the president fully embraced his new role and told Americans — just as he did in a Rose Garden speech earlier this week — that Obamacare will be a success despite the glitches still plaguing his law ’ s website .
“ Some people have poked fun at me this week for sounding like an insurance salesman . And that ’ s OK , ” Mr. Obama said . “ I ’ d still be out there championing this law even if the website were perfect . I ’ ll never stop fighting to help more hardworking Americans know the economic security of health care . That ’ s something we should all want . ”
It ’ s been a rocky first month for Mr. Obama ’ s health care reform act , as the federal government struggles to repair a website that , by almost all accounts , has largely been a disaster since launching Oct. 1 .
This week , the White House announced it would “ realign ” the date by which Americans must purchase insurance or face fines .
The move will give the uninsured until March 31 to buy coverage , rather than the previous de facto cut-off of Feb. 15 .
The move has been described by critics as a retreat , an admission that the Obamacare roll-out has been a failure .
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell , for example , described it as an “ expensive joke . ”
But the president tells a much different story . He ’ s directing Americans to enroll for coverage over the phone or in person , and promises that , eventually , HealthCare.gov will function as intended .
He ’ s also pushing back at the assumption that , because of the flawed website , Obamacare will fall flat .
“ We did not fight so hard for this reform for so many years just to build a website , ” he said . “ We did it to free millions of American families from the awful fear that one illness or injury — to yourself or your child — might cost you everything you ’ d worked so hard to build . We did it to cement the principle that in this country , the security of health care is not a privilege for a fortunate few , but a right for every one of us to enjoy . We have already delivered on part of that promise and we will not rest until the work is done . ”