While the administration maintains that ObamaCare will make health insurance more affordable for Americans , experts say that won ’ t be the case across the board – and some people could see their rates soar .
On Wednesday , Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius released an overview of premiums and plan choices , saying “ For millions of Americans , these new options will finally make health insurance work within their budgets . ”
The administration also said premiums would generally be lower than what congressional budget experts had estimated during debate on the legislation .
But former Congressional Budget Office Director Doug Holtz-Eakin said Thursday , “ unfortunately you can go all through that HHS report and not be able to answer the most important question : will my insurance rates go up in 2014 ? ''
`` They cherry picked the data in order to highlight the fact that people of low income will benefit under the law , '' adds Avik Roy of the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research , a New York-based think tank . `` But people of middle income will not . And they didn ’ t really talk about that . ''
The new law requires the addition of what it calls essential benefits -- a list of things that must be covered and which make insurance more expensive than it is now .
`` This report is intended to send the message , 'hey everybody wins , this is a great thing , please show up , '' says Holtz-Eakin .
`` That 's not the reality . The reality is much messier . There 's going to be some people who do better . There are going to be a lot of people who do much , much worse . ''
The Manhattan Institute analyzed rates around the country and found that for people of medium income , costs will soar -- up by as much as 99 percent for men , and up about 55 percent for women .
`` Even if the average American gets some subsidy , a partial subsidy , '' says Roy , who authored the study , '' that partial subsidy wo n't be enough to overcome the dramatic increase in the cost of insurance , the underlying cost of insurance ObamaCare imposes on the market . ''
But insurance premiums are only one part of the puzzle . Most plans also have very high deductibles .
`` Do you have a large deductible ? '' asks Holtz-Eakin . `` How much do you have to pay before the insurance starts picking up the cost ? ''
Analysts expect deductibles to be in the $ 5,000 to $ 6,000 range for the lowest level of coverage , the bronze plan .
Dan Mendelson , CEO and founder at Avalere Health in Washington , says , '' So , if you 're in a bronze plan , the premiums are going to be relatively low , you know , as HHS said , in some cases people wo n't pay premiums at all .
“ But there are going to be very high out of pocket costs and deductibles in some cases are going to be over $ 5,500 . ''
That means a person with a plan at that level might only pay $ 100 dollars a month in premiums , as the administration has said .
But depending on medical events , the deductible could add almost $ 500 dollars a month more , without even counting the co-pays