The Trump administration said Friday that 9.2 million people signed up for health coverage this year on the main Obamacare website , a drop-off of about 400,000 customers from last year ’ s effort .
Activity on HealthCare.gov had been running ahead of 2016 signups in the final weeks of President Obama ’ s tenure , despite rampant GOP talk of repeal , yet that enthusiasm appeared to wane ahead of the Jan. 31 deadline .
The update doesn ’ t include final data from a dozen state-run exchanges , although available figures show that at least 12 million people selected private coverage for the 2017 plan year under the Affordable Care Act , often with the help of taxpayer-funded subsidies .
Unless the remaining states report a robust finish , the law will fall short of Mr. Obama ’ s target of 13.8 million signups for this year .
“ Signups are falling somewhat short of last year , which is movement in the wrong direction for improving the risk pool but hardly a collapse , ” said Larry Levitt , a senior vice president at the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation .
Democrats insist the law can still be fixed , yet congressional Republicans seeking to repeal and replace the law with President Trump said the federal update showed dwindling interest in the law and that numbers would droop further , since customers must effectuate their coverage by paying their first month ’ s bill .
“ Not only have today ’ s numbers failed to keep pace with last year ’ s , they also fail to account for those individuals who will actually follow through and pay the premiums , ” Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch , Utah Republican , said . “ Whether families can and will pay the 25 percent average increase over last year for benchmark plans remains in question . Either way , enrollment numbers are down and costs are up . These cost hikes are exactly the reason why Republicans are committed to repealing and replacing Obamacare . ”
Obamacare ’ s supporters , meanwhile , interpreted the figures as a testament to the law ’ s staying power , despite rampant talk of repeal and Mr. Trump ’ s decision to yank up to $ 5 million TV and radio advertising ahead of a crucial final week of signups .
Ben Wakana , a spokesman for the Health and Human Services Department under Mr. Obama , said “ the Trump administration ’ s efforts to suppress enrollment clearly had an impact . ”
There were roughly 375,000 in the final two weeks of 2017 enrollment compared to roughly 700,000 in the last week of last year ’ s effort alone .
“ When President Obama left office , enrollment was outpacing last year , ” Mr. Wakana said . “ Since taking office , the new administration deliberately sabotaged the law : pulled down advertising , threatened outreach efforts , and sewed uncertainty about consumer protections . 12 million people are now covered , and Republicans must come up with a plan before ripping their health care away . ”
Friday ’ s announcement from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services exhibited a clear shift in tone from the Obama era , when agency officials cheered the law at every turn .
Under Mr. Trump , the agency noted that customers faced an average premium hike of 25 percent among popular “ benchmark plans ” and a 28-percent drop in the number of participating insurers in 2017 .