In Washington this week , calls to fix the problem of people getting insurance cancellation notices are getting louder and coming from all sides . But turning back the clock on health insurance cancellations turns out to be a lot harder than it sounds .
Republicans have been blasting the president for weeks about breaking his promise that people would be able to keep their insurance policies . Later this week , the GOP-led House will vote on a bill called the Keep Your Health Plan Act .
What 's changing is that Democrats are now starting to join the chorus .
Last week , Sen. Mary Landrieu , D-La. , who 's facing a tough re-election bid next fall , introduced legislation aimed at letting more people keep their plans .
`` We said to people : If you had insurance that you liked you could keep it , '' she said on the Senate floor . `` We did n't say : If you had insurance that you liked that did n't meet the minimum standards , or met the minimum standards , you could keep it . We just said , and the president said , over and over , 'If you have insurance and you like the insurance you have , you can keep it . ' That is the single focus of my bill . ''
On Tuesday , former President Bill Clinton , who 's been dubbed the explainer in chief for the health law , added his backing .
`` I personally believe , even if it takes a change in the law , that the president should honor the commitment the federal government made to those people and let them keep what they got , '' he said in an interview with the online magazine Ozy.com .
Even President Obama himself has hinted that he wants to do something about the problem of people getting their policies canceled .
`` I am deeply concerned about it , '' he told NBC 's Chuck Todd last week , `` and I have assigned my team to see what we can do to close some of the holes and gaps in the law . ''
So far , though , the administration has n't proposed anything specific for those people in the individual insurance market getting cancellation notices . And there 's a good reason for that , say industry experts . The bottom line is that it 's simply too late to undo those canceled policies .
`` It 's not at all feasible , '' says Robert Laszewski , president of the consulting firm Health Policy and Strategy Associates . `` It would be wonderful . I 'm one of the people who got my policy canceled . I would like to keep it , but we ca n't get that fix in place in 45 days . ''
That 45 days is between now and Jan. 1 , when the new standards under the Affordable Care Act kick in . Laszewski says the insurance industry has spent most of the past year getting ready for this . They 've rewritten policies , gotten them approved by state regulators , and found and updated information with their policyholders .
`` Even if you decide to go 'never mind ' about all these cancellations , '' he says , `` how is the insurance company going to send out letters to all these people within the space of a couple of weeks , rejigger all of their computer systems that took months to redo in the first place , and get these people to decide whether they want to try for Obamacare , which is the only place they can get subsidies , or try to stay on their own policies ? ''
Joel Ario , managing director at the consulting firm Manatt Health Solutions , is n't quite so negative . He says that just this week in California , two insurers have agreed to continue to offer some existing plans , at least temporarily . But that 's a bit of a different situation , he says , because they settled with the state 's insurance commissioner .
`` Their earlier cancellations were not proper under California law , '' says Ario , `` and they are extending their policies — in one case [ by ] another couple months , and in another case [ by ] three months . So clearly it can be done by the carriers to extend current coverages . ''
But Ario , who earlier headed the federal government 's health exchange program , says if the insurance companies did everything correctly , it would n't be fair to require them to extend their current policies at their current rates .
`` If they were to continue coverages , they would ask for a rate increase , '' he says . `` Typically in the individual market there are significant rate increases on a year-to-year basis . ''
Many people would actually do better financially in the exchanges with a tax credit , Ario says , rather than stick with their current policy with an inflation increase . They just do n't realize that because they have n't been able to get on the website yet to see .
Which brings the question back to where the Affordable Care Act has been since October : Can the federal government get its balky website up and running at full strength fast enough for a critical mass of those canceled policyholders to figure out they might be OK after all ?