Bad news for Team Obama , ObamaCare is more unpopular than it has ever been according to new Fox News poll and more people than ever want the legislation repealed .
A record number of voters want the 2010 Affordable Care Act repealed entirely , while sizable majorities say they are worried about their health care under the new law and expect their medical costs will go up , according to a new Fox News poll .
The poll , released Wednesday , finds that 58 percent of voters favor repealing all ( 39 percent ) or some ( 19 percent ) of President Obama ’ s signature legislative achievement .
Another 19 percent would leave the law as is , while 17 percent would expand its coverage further .
The 39 percent who want to repeal the health care law entirely is a record high , up from 30 percent who felt that way in March 2013 .
The differing views follow partisan lines : Most Republicans favor repealing all ( 65 percent ) or parts of the health care law ( 18 percent ) , while most Democrats want to see the law expanded ( 31 percent ) or kept in place as-is ( 30 percent ) .
A 62-percent majority of independents favors repealing at least some of the law .
Nearly three times as many voters say the health care law makes them feel more worried ( 66 percent ) rather than reassured ( 23 percent ) . And the anxiety is rising -- the number feeling worried is up 15 percentage points since July 2012 , soon after the U.S. Supreme Court ruled the law constitutional last year .
Officials working to implement President Obama ’ s signature program recognize the need to generate buzz , and are working around the clock to come up with a marketing campaign that convinces young people to participate .
They ’ re reaching out to the NFL , the NBA and Hollywood for help , and counting down the days to Oct. 1 , when enrollment in the exchanges officially begins .
The administration is in a good position to secure splashy endorsements , as Obama ’ s 2008 and 2012 campaigns had a deep bench of celebrity surrogates .
“ Beyoncé all but took on the first lady ’ s ‘ Let ’ s Move ! ’ platform , so imagine the pull Obama will have to sell healthcare , ” said one former administration official .
Celebrity endorsements , slick ad campaigns and cutting-edge online enrollment would all serve one overriding purpose for the White House : connecting young , healthy people with their new healthcare benefits .
These numbers come just days after Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius admitted the administration was in talks with the NBA and the NFL to help promote ObamaCare . It also looks like the administration is trying to get Hollywood celebrities onboard to do the same . ObamaCare is n't getting repealed , not under this President anyway . The best we can hope for is that Congress will defund it or that it will collapse on itself .