Updated on Sept. 27 at 7:06 p.m . ET to reflect the latest information from federal agencies
An outbreak of severe lung disease among users of electronic cigarettes continues to spread to new patients and states .
According to the latest report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , a total of 805 cases have been reported in 46 states and the U.S. Virgin Islands . The CDC has confirmed 12 deaths , in 10 states . The median age of patients was 23 and 69 % were male , according to a report published Friday by the agency .
Public health officials are taking urgent steps to identify what is causing previously healthy vape users to develop pneumonia-like symptoms . But the results are still inconclusive .
In a press briefing on Friday , the CDC reported that the investigation is ongoing , and involves several federal agencies and state health departments .
`` CDC recommends people consider refraining from using e-cigarette , or vaping , products , particularly those containing THC , '' said Dr. Anne Schuchat , the CDC 's principal deputy director .
`` We do not know yet what exactly is making people sick , '' said Schuchat . But the CDC is now reporting that `` THC may play a role . '' There is still no definitive link to any brand of device , ingredient , flavor or substance among all outbreak patients , but according to the CDC 's most recent statement , health officials are beginning to see `` patterns emerge . ''
The outbreak has affected users of both THC- and nicotine-containing products , but it is more prevalent among people using THC than people who report using only nicotine products . Among 514 patients for whom the CDC has information on substances used , nearly 77 % report having vaped THC , 36 % report using THC as well as nicotine , and 16 % report vaping only nicotine .
According to a report published Friday on 86 cases in Wisconsin and Illinois , investigators found that of the THC-products used by patients , nearly all were prepacked , pre-filled cartridges acquired from informal sources like friends and illicit dealers .
In all confirmed cases , patients reported vaping within 90 days of developing symptoms , and most had vaped within a week of symptom onset . Patients with confirmed cases have been tested to rule out infections that could explain their symptoms . There is no indication that the outbreak is contagious .
Patients report experiencing rapid onset of coughing , weight loss and significant breathing difficulties . Other symptoms may include nausea , vomiting and diarrhea . Symptoms generally appear over the course of a few days but can take as long as a few weeks to arise . The majority of patients are hospitalized , and while many of their symptoms overlap , their various diagnoses have included lipoid pneumonia ( which can occur when oil enters the lungs ) , acute eosinophilic pneumonia ( caused by the buildup of a type of white blood cell in the lungs ) and acute respiratory distress syndrome .
What are public agencies doing to get to the bottom of this ?
The CDC is working closely with affected states to understand the nature of the illness and the extent of its impact . The Food and Drug Administration issued a statement saying it is `` deeply concerned about these incidents '' and is working closely with the CDC to investigate the outbreak as quickly as possible . The FDA is analyzing a collection of over 120 product samples provided by state public health officials for the presence of a broad range of chemicals , including nicotine , THC and other cannabinoids , cutting agents , additives , pesticides , opioids , poisons , heavy metals and toxins .
`` More information is needed to better understand whether there is a relationship between any specific products and any specific substances in those products and the reported illnesses , '' Mitch Zeller , director of the FDA 's Center for Tobacco Products , said in a press briefing in mid-September .
On Sept. 16 , the CDC announced it activated its Emergency Operations Center to provide increased operational support for the response .
The FDA announced Sept. 19 it has enlisted the help of its office of criminal investigations , the law enforcement arm of the FDA . `` We are in desperate need of facts , '' Zeller said . He emphasized that the FDA is not looking to prosecute anyone for personal use of any of the substances linked to the vaping illnesses .
Possibly . As NPR reported this month , vitamin E became a `` key focus '' of New York state health officials ' investigation after cannabis-containing vaping cartridges submitted by those who had fallen ill tested positive for vitamin E acetate . But of the e-cigarette products tested by the FDA to date , Zeller said `` no one substance or compound , including vitamin E acetate , has been identified in all the samples tested . ''
Nonetheless , the FDA said in a statement , `` it is prudent to avoid inhaling this substance . '' Vitamin E is a component of many topical consumer products and supplements .
The CDC recommends that people refrain from using e-cigarettes altogether while this investigation is ongoing and especially avoid products from unlicensed vendors . The FDA urges consumers to avoid using THC vaping products , regardless of whether the products were purchased on the street or in stores , owing to the possibility that the products may contain vitamin E acetate .
If people are unable to stop vaping , the CDC suggests they monitor themselves for symptoms and seek prompt medical attention if they experience cough , shortness of breath , chest pain or nausea and vomiting .
Are flavored vapes more likely to be dangerous , and is that why the FDA is planning to ban them ?
The role of flavored vape products in the current outbreak is unknown at this time . Some lawmakers and public health advocates have been pushing for flavored vape products to be banned since flavors first entered the market , out of concern that they appeal to children . The timing of the recent move to ban flavored vape products may be linked to the current public concern about overall e-cigarette safety . Paul Billings , national senior vice president of advocacy at the American Lung Association , told NPR that `` unfortunately it 's taken this crisis to finally prompt this action . ''
Is this really new , or has it always been a risk of vaping ?
Public health officials are working to confirm that this is a new phenomenon and not simply a case of raised awareness among medical providers and patients , but it 's too soon to know for sure . Jennifer Layden , chief medical officer of the Illinois Department of Public Health , told reporters , `` I do n't think we can say if it 's a new or newly recognized phenomenon , '' although according to preliminary findings , `` it does appear to be an increase of cases . ''