Adult enrollment in ObamaCare ’ s Medicaid expansion has more than doubled expectations in states across the country -- pointing to ballooning costs that threaten budget dollars for priorities like education and infrastructure , according to a report released Wednesday by The Foundation for Government Accountability .
Newly obtained data from 24 of the 29 states with Medicaid expansions show at least 11.5 million able-bodied adults have enrolled . The FGA says adult enrollment for all these states exceeds projections , by an average of 110 percent . Some states have signed up more than four times as many adults as they expected would enroll .
“ A lot of folks on the left will say that this is a huge sign of success -- look at all of these people who need coverage and help , ” Nicholas Horton , senior research fellow at FGA and co-author of the report , told FoxNews.com . “ My response is that it is not success when you have able-bodied adults who are being trapped in welfare and reducing their incentive to work . ”
The swelling enrollment also points to potential budget problems for the states .
Starting in January 2017 , states ’ share of Medicaid expansion costs will increase to 5 percent and , as noted in the FGA ’ s report , those costs gradually will rise to 10 percent by 2020 . With costs rising more quickly than ObamaCare advocates projected , the FGA expects state budgets to take a hit .
“ We ’ ve used deficit spending to pay for these people in federal dollars , and come January , states are going to have to use state dollars to pay for the program , ” FGA senior fellow Josh Archambault said . “ The one caveat in this is that every state dollar spent on able-bodied adults in a Medicaid program is one less dollar that can be spent on other programs . This is essentially eating up tons of funds at the state level . ”
The FGA report also claims that Medicaid expansion makes welfare for able-bodied adults a higher priority than services for the nearly 600,000 seniors and children with developmental disabilities , individuals with brain injuries and others on waiting lists for additional Medicaid services .
But according to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services , a division under the federal Department of Health and Human Services , these waiting lists are unrelated to the Medicaid expansion and pre-date ObamaCare , formally known as the Affordable Care Act .
Before ObamaCare , Medicaid eligibility extended mostly to low-income , disabled adults and some pregnant women and children . Under the Affordable Care Act , the program now allows coverage for most low-income Americans under age 65 in states that OK ’ d the expansion -- while other families not qualifying for Medicaid can still receive premium subsidies on the ObamaCare exchanges .
House Republican Study Committee Chairman Rep. Bill Flores , R-Texas , told ███ that ObamaCare as a whole “ is a welfare program masquerading as health care reform . ”
“ Enrollment projections were nothing but fantasy , cost estimates little more than wishful thinking , and positive health outcomes were grossly overstated , ” he said .
But according to CMS , the Medicaid expansion has had major positive health and economic benefits for citizens and states .
“ Medicaid expansion does not trade off against coverage for people with disabilities , ” CMS spokesman Aaron Albright told ███ . “ In fact , Medicaid expansion has allowed many eligible individuals with disabilities to get coverage . ”
The future of ObamaCare – including the Medicaid expansion and other myriad elements of the sprawling program – remains in doubt now that Donald Trump has been elected president . He has vowed to “ repeal and replace ” the law , and has the support of congressional Republicans who kept their majority in last week ’ s election .
“ Our path forward is clear : we must repeal this unsustainable burden and replace it with real reforms that improve access to quality health care at lower prices , ” Flores said .