House Republican leaders are forging ahead with plans to hold a vote Wednesday on a full repeal of President Obama 's health care law , after launching debate on the repeal measure Tuesday nearly two weeks after the Supreme Court upheld most of the law as constitutional .
Wednesday will mark the chamber 's second vote to repeal the Affordable Care Act in full , though this attempt is being given no greater chance of passing the Democratic-controlled Senate . Obama has vowed to veto any such measure , were it to reach his desk .
House Republicans have held 29 other votes aiming to gut specific parts of the law since 2011 .
The House Rules Committee on Monday allotted five hours of floor debate for the latest measure . Lawmakers plowed through four and a half hours on Tuesday , with the remaining time set aside for the day of the vote .
Democrats accused the Republicans of wasting time with a display of political theater instead of focusing attention on helping the economy .
“ We could spend five hours talking about jobs . We could consider a jobs plan that the president offered before this very body . But we wo n't . Because we have to go repeal health care again for the thirty-first time , ” Rep. Keith Ellison , D-Minn. , said on the House floor .
“ You would have thought the 17th time would be good . The 29th time . The 31st time is like they are going for a record or something , ” Ellison said .
Democrats also argued that the Supreme Court ’ s ruling to preserve the law indicated that Republicans should turn to other issues .
“ It 's time for Republicans to move on , ” Rep. Donna Edwards , D-Md. , said .
Meanwhile , Republicans held firm in their stance on the issue -- an issue that helped usher in their majority with sweeping victories during the 2010 midterm elections . They contended that the high court only declared the law constitutional , not good policy .
“ House Republicans promised the American people that if granted the majority , we would repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , better known as ObamaCare , ” House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton , R-Mich. , said during floor debate . “ Let ’ s face it , ObamaCare is nothing like what was promised . ”
Republicans insisted they would maintain their efforts to repeal the law .
“ I have voted to repeal this 30 times , and I will keep doing it until we get it right , ” Rep. Lee Terry , R-Neb. , said .