Under the provision to set up state-based marketplaces , subsidies are supposed to be available to many lower- and middle-income people who do not have access to coverage from employers or other sources . It may be difficult , however , for officials running the exchanges to know who is entitled to subsidies if employers do not report information on the coverage they provide to workers .
Enrollment in the exchanges is to begin Oct. 1 , with insurance coverage taking effect on Jan. 1 . “ We are on target to open the health insurance marketplace on Oct. 1 where small businesses and ordinary Americans will be able to go to one place to learn about their coverage options and make side-by-side comparisons of each plan ’ s price and benefits before they make their decision , ” Valerie Jarrett , Mr. Obama ’ s senior adviser and liaison to the business community , wrote on the White House Web site .
But even some supporters of the law dispute that the establishment of the health insurance exchanges is on schedule , especially since progress varies by state and some Republican-led states are resisting the health care law and withholding resources for putting it into effect .
Much of the administration ’ s public effort , especially at the Department of Health and Human Services , has been directed toward spreading the word to uninsured Americans , especially younger and healthy individuals whose participation is needed to help keep down premiums for everyone else . About 85 percent of Americans are insured , so most individuals will be unaffected , at least initially .
Behind the scenes , however , the administration has been fielding questions and criticisms from businesses about the reporting requirements — especially the Treasury Department , which has responsibility , given its oversight of the tax reporting system .
Employer groups were quick to applaud the delay . At the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , which has strongly opposed the law , Randy Johnson , senior vice president for labor , immigration and employee benefits , said in a statement , “ The administration has finally recognized the obvious — employers need more time and clarification of the rules of the road before implementing the employer mandate . ”
E. Neil Trautwein , a vice president of the National Retail Federation , said the delay “ will provide employers and businesses more time to update their health care coverage without threat of arbitrary punishment . ”