Almost everyone believes the following : Vaccines are a good and necessary part of medicine .
Some people , and more people every day , believe this , too : Those who do n't believe in the virtues of vaccines — anti-vaxxers — are ignorant and dangerous lunatics , possibly evil .
I spent most of my life believing that . During my early 20s , I lived in the skeptic blogosphere , a mid-2000s constellation of internet communities theoretically organized around highly charismatic bloggers , vloggers , and other intellectuals . In practice , however , these groups were centered on a more basic principle : hostility toward anyone and anything it deemed `` irrational . '' It was then and is still now a very white , male , and defensive place .
It was there that I developed a deep antipathy toward the anti-vaccination movement . It was n't that I knew they were wrong about vaccines . It was more than that . I believed myself intellectually and morally superior to those people , and I reinforced that belief each time I left a comment or watched a vlog or republished a snarky article on the subject . I mastered a face , a kind of appalled , disapproving look for any time anybody even broached the subject of vaccine skepticism .
I met my wife nine years ago . I wanted to take up swing dancing and decided to take a private class to get over some of my anxiety . She was the teacher who picked up the phone when I called .
I was immediately attracted to her , but at the time she was engaged to her dancing partner , the father of her daughter .
So at first we built a platonic friendship . We spent time together . We bonded over our mutual interest in dancing . I had known her for more than a year the first time she mentioned that her daughter was not vaccinated .
What do you do , then , when someone you believe is both smart and sensible comes to a conclusion you find completely wrong ? Does that person stop being smart at that precise moment ?
My time reading ( arrogant ) skeptic blogs had convinced me of my moral and intellectual superiority . I believed that because I was a smart , sensible , and empathetic person I could see the value of vaccines . Yet here this woman was . I knew she was n't dumb — in fact , I thought she was very insightful . I knew she was n't dangerous or conspiratorial — we had talked for days about how we care about people , and the society we live in , and what it means to be human . I already trusted her .
Did I have to completely reassess my opinion of this person ? Did I have to examine my own biases and mental caricatures , decide that anti-vaxxers are people too ?
Well , no . I did what most people did : opted for cognitive dissonance . I decided it was n't worth getting into a fight over , that she could be my friend and have weird opinions about vaccines at the same time . Even as she broke up with her partner , and I broke up with mine , and we found ourselves spending a lot of time together , I ignored the issue . The subject of vaccines came up once or twice over dinners , but so what ? I could see she loved and cared deeply for her daughter . She was someone I admired and respected and was beginning to love . Vaccines did n't get in the way .
And , of course , I believed that if we spent enough time together , I 'd eventually change her mind .
It 's not that anti-vaxxers are stupid , or that they 're corrupt . It 's that they 're afraid .
This is the beating heart of any real discussion about anti-vaxxers . It 's impossible to understand their position without considering the amount of fear that goes into the anti-vaccine narrative , and considering how people construct and deal with fear .
I believed that if we spent enough time together , I 'd eventually change her mind
Now , you might think that a fear is a fear and public health is something else — and you might be right . That 's the rational point of view . But then , how rational are your own fears ?
Maybe you 're afraid of heights . Maybe it 's spiders . In either case , you 're lucky : Coping with your fear the way most people do — avoidance — does n't come at a cost to others . But vaccines only work when everyone buys in . Public health depends on anti-vaxxers confronting their greatest fears for the benefit of others .
For people who do n't share their fear , it 's very easy and convenient to demand that anti-vaxxers just suck it up and take the shot . I wish they would , too . But we 'll never get there by bullying them , by insulting and demeaning them and refusing to take the fact of their fear seriously , even if there is n't much that 's serious in its content .
That 's hard to do . Have you ever tried to stare a loved one into the eye and tell her you are going to put her child in danger ?
Despite initially avoiding the subject , I decided , after we were married , that I should convince my wife to vaccinate her daughter . Vaccines are good , after all . Vaccines are safe . Measles outbreaks had been on the news — what better time to raise the subject ?
But when I did , I realized that from her perspective , all of my confrontational reasoning sounded like me asking to point a gun at her daughter and have her trust that it was full of blanks . Looking into her eyes , I realized her trust in me was threatened . She asked why I would do that to a child . All of my insistence that vaccines are safe did n't matter . Go tell arachnophobic parents that you must put spiders on their child because society depends on it , and see how that goes . The benefits of getting the shot , expressed in the abstract , simply could not overpower the immediate , disarming fear .
So I backed down . The anti-vax position was not a deal breaker for me , but suggesting that we should expose her daughter to grave dangers for no good reason was a deal breaker for my wife . I loved my wife . I had no desire to end things . Yes , I think it was very important for her daughter to receive vaccines — but it 's not as if my wife would have changed her mind over a breakup fight .
I backed down and resolved to have that conversation in less confrontational terms when the opportunity arose .
3 ) If you think something is dangerous , it 's logical to avoid it
My wife is one of the smartest , most sensible people I know . So what do smart , sensible people do when they perceive a threat ? They do the smart , sensible thing : take precautions and warn others .
Again , it 's easy to dismiss the worries of anti-vaxxers as irrational and chalk up their activism to paranoid behavior , but this misses a crucial point : The reasoning , once you accept the big , unsubstantiated premise , is valid . It is n't even that far-fetched , if you do n't think about it too hard : There are some heartbreaking precedents that feed this logic . Lead paint , tobacco , bloodletting — every time we feel the urge to reply , `` But vaccines are safe , everyone knows that , '' we ought to remember that the same sentence has been said , earnestly and confidently , about things that absolutely were hazardous .
Go tell arachnophobic parents that you must put spiders on their child because society depends on it , and see how that goes
If you 've come to believe that vaccines are dangerous , then anti-vax behavior follows almost rationally . If we want to reach these people , dismissing their logic as ridiculous or fringe is the worst strategy . It plays right into the anti-vaccination narrative : that they are the `` only sane ones , '' warning the careless masses about a very real and hidden danger .
My wife ( and her family ) sincerely believes that though her worries are being recognized as irrational , they are n't . It 's easy to imagine how the very first person to notice the dangers of something ubiquitous , like lead , was dismissed by her peers as irrationally afraid — and to imagine you might be one of these people . The first anti-lead folks were called cranks — until they were proven right .
My point is n't that the anti-vaxxers might be right . They 're not . My point is that once you believe something untrue , it 's very easy to keep rationalizing that belief . It 's very easy to dismiss your critics as shortsighted . And when you 're constantly attacked , it 's natural to make your resilience part of your identity , to become even more committed to maintaining it .
People are not essays , where you can go back to a previous paragraph and undermine the priors through careful , unperturbed dissection . People talk , and people balk . My wife would not stand to have me pick her apart like she is a problem that needs to be solved ; her priors — like everyone else 's — are part of her identity . All of us have beliefs of this sort ; it 's just that most of us can get away with them more easily . We need to stop seeing anti-vaxxers as people who can be persuaded to abandon a bad idea , and instead as people we 're asking to abandon a part of themselves — people whose defensive sense of identity we 've encouraged with bad tactics .
4 ) There 's an industry supporting anti-vaxxers — and we 're driving them into its arms
A sense of identity is n't the only thing that makes anti-vaxxers impervious to confrontational argument . If you take a deeply controversial position , especially in the beginning , you wo n't last long without a strong support system . Unfortunately , fear sells — and there 's always someone willing to give you that support for a price .
Evidently , people who do n't trust or value conventional medicine still get sick . In Canada , where I live , socialized health care covers almost all conventional health-care costs , but there is a serious private market for people who would rather get their treatments from alternative sources . These alternative sources can do some good : Sick people need care , and some amount of care is usually better than no care at all . But the alternative health industry is also a business , and at its worst , this is how the business works : Articles about children turning `` autistic '' after a shot are circulated by authors selling books , websites selling ads , and merchants selling cures . When you 're in the business of selling treatments against a subsidized competitor , your pitch needs to be emotive , essential . It needs to appeal to the values of your audience . Since there is a real economy hinging on people not trusting conventional medicine , its actors churn out sensationalist scare pieces by the truckload , which validates the preexisting anxieties of anti-vaxxers ad nauseam — and drive them into the arms of the people willing to sell them a solution .
Support networks can also come from somewhere closer to home .
Back when my wife and I were just friends , I met her sister a couple of times . She is a very pleasant , completely agreeable , and naturally sociable person . I really had no reason to be anything less than friendly to her . Then my wife told me that her sister is a naturopath who studied the toxic effects of vaccines `` extensively . ''
My sister-in-law is also a big part of my wife 's support network . When my wife is second-guessing herself about vaccines — like when her daughter 's father raised the issue after their separation — she turns to her sister . Her sister is even deeper in the movement that she is — she 's a provider of alternative medicines by trade — and when they talk , my wife comes away more sure of the anti-vax worldview . Again : This is n't a strange behavior . How many times have you wondered about something important , only to be reassured by a conversation with a loved one ?
Of course , it 's not uniquely devious for anti-vaxxers to seek like-minded people to validate their views ; we all do it . One of the reasons I like many of the newspapers and magazines I like , for instance , is because they tell me things I already think about foreign policy , urbanism , feminism , and race — we all suffer from confirmation bias to some extent . But unlike more ordinary biases , the alternative medicine racket is completely unchecked ; by definition , it eschews mainstream checks on its theories and practices . It cashes in on encouraging the isolation and dependence of its participants . This is an environment in which every hypothesis is given equal weight , and all of them come packaged with some kind of product recommendation .
Without a profitable industry , anti-vax beliefs might not survive long . But again , what do we do ? The monolithic media presence of the vaccination narrative gives skeptics an `` assaulted and oppressed '' outlook that encourages its members to seek out corners that coddle their worldviews . Those corners then sell them back their own biases — and they become even more confident that they 're right .
5 ) Changing someone 's mind does n't just take love . It takes empathy .
I decided to write this piece after it was revealed that Pandemrix , a vaccine designed to combat swine flu , was causing narcolepsy in children . As Julia Belluz pointed out on this site , the 2013 discovery was hardly covered by the media despite real and demonstrated side effects — precisely the kind of behavior anti-vaxxers suspect is happening with all vaccines .
I keep an eye out for stories like this , one that could allow my wife and me to discuss vaccination in nonconfrontational terms . A story like Pandemrix allowed me to engage her in good faith , to admit that sometimes medicine makes bad calls and that the media can be complicit . I brought it up to my wife to show that I care about her worries , that I do n't think they are beyond the pale . When easing somebody 's fears , love is rarely enough — empathy is needed , especially when you want to persuade . Refusing to engage in any open-minded discussion , to concede that things can go wrong , to admit that it 's possible we do n't know everything : That kind of condescension had gotten me nowhere with my wife and her daughter no closer to vaccinations . It has n't gotten the broader fight against anti-vaxxers very far either .
When easing somebody 's fears , love is rarely enough — empathy is needed , especially when you want to persuade
A lack of personal investment is , as it happens , what led to my wife 's initial rejection of vaccines : She had a very unfortunate run-in with a complacent MD in her late teens , while she was going through a lot of pain physically and mentally .
It started with a drug-induced psychotic breakdown . She grew up in something of a broken home , with an absent father , an addict mother , and a violent stepfather — an environment where drugs were easy to come by and hard to ignore . At 17 , she smoked something weird and felt herself quite literally losing it . Hallucinations . Panic attacks . Nausea and heart palpitations . After a grueling week of recovering from the episode , she did the normal thing and took herself to a doctor .
She got out with a prescription and an unshakable feeling that this doctor , and his clinic , and the government that paid for his services , did not care at all about her concerns , her needs , and her fears . That she was a problem that could be solved with a couple of pills . That the fear she had felt for her sanity was not respected , not even considered . That the solution to her drug problem was more drugs .
Four clean years later , she was taking naturopathy classes with her sister .
This is not a breach of trust that can be restored by telling her vaccines are safe .
It 's obvious and painful that all human systems are going to fail at some places due to human imperfection . It 's probably impossible to force all doctors to be nice and considerate people .
Maybe my wife would have felt just as abandoned even if the doctor did everything right at that moment . But knowing that for many anti-vaxxers there is a root cause — something that led them to mistrust medicine and then wind up in a feedback loop that reinforced that mistrust — is vital to pushing back . I do think minds can be changed and hearts can be won , but I 've made my peace : Only love , patience , and empathy will make inroads . Treat anti-vaxxers kindly , if only because it 's pretty hard to feel persecuted when your adversaries are being kind . This is the road I chose , and I am happy to share my life with a person who challenges and inspires me . Someone whom , a mere decade ago , I would have considered a dangerous lunatic .
And then , last week , her daughter asked if she would be getting shots this year .
`` Not with your classmates , '' my wife said . `` But yes , it 's time . We 'll schedule an appointment with our new family doctor . ''