A House panel is beginning to look into HealthCare.gov ’ s flawed rollout . | M.Scott Mahaskey/███ Contractors grilled on the Hill
Top Obamacare contractors said Thursday they never recommended that the Obama administration delay the Oct. 1 launch of HealthCare.gov — even though some of them harbored doubts about a website that would crash shortly after it went live .
Republicans pressed four contractors appearing before the House Energy and Commerce Committee on why they had told Congress in September that Obamacare ’ s online enrollment system was on track , only to go off the rails in October .
Republican lawmakers accused both the contractors and the administration of withholding information about the looming failure of the pivotal piece of President Barack Obama ’ s signature domestic achievement .
It was the first hearing into Obamacare since its launch — and the first since the government shutdown provoked by the GOP attempt to stop or delay the law . Republicans and Democrats sparred with the contractors and clashed with one another , as the Republicans shifted from their failed efforts to halt Obamacare to a new drive to illuminate the law ’ s flaws through their oversight powers .
Lawmakers of both parties are fuming for very different reasons . Democrats are upset that the $ 600 million-plus system isn ’ t working right after more than three years of preparation and a lot of political heat . Republicans — frustrated that the government shutdown had deflected attention from Obamacare rollout problems — are eager to prove the website problems are symbolic of everything that ’ s harmful about a health law that they see as too big , too expensive , too intrusive and too unworkable . Both sides expect the health law to feature in key 2014 Senate races .
Committee Chairman Fred Upton ( R-Mich. ) said the central question was accountability .
“ Over the months leading up to the Oct. 1 launch , top administration officials and lead contractors appeared before this committee , looked us in the eye and assured us repeatedly that everything was on track , ” Upton said . “ Except that it wasn ’ t , as we now know too well . ”
Democrats , who acknowledged and critiqued the early technology challenges , tried to highlight the law ’ s health benefits and portrayed the GOP inquiry as an ideologically driven effort to derail Obamacare . Democrats also recalled that the Medicare drug benefit had a rocky start before eventually becoming popular .
The hearing got testy at times . “ I will not yield to this monkey court , ” Rep. Frank Pallone ( D-N.J. ) declared of Republican colleagues ’ efforts to steer the attention to online privacy fears .
The hours of testimony included previously undisclosed details about which components and pieces of the intricate system were and were not adequately tested , what the perceived vulnerabilities were and the level of White House involvement .
“ The White House has not given us direct instructions , ” testified Cheryl Campbell of CGI Federal , which built the federal exchange ’ s enrollment system and is considered the lead contractor . Asked directly if she ’ s aware of any political intervention in CGI ’ s work , she said , “ I am not . ”
The contractors all deflected the blame for a website that continues to perform below expectations , though the administration and contractors cite continuing improvements to the system . The blame , the contractors said , falls on CMS because they are the “ systems integrator ” responsible for pulling together the contractors ’ work and assessing overall readiness .
“ It was not our decision to go live , ” Campbell said . “ It was [ CMS ’ s ] decision . ”
Republican requests for who exactly at CMS should be held accountable for the bungled rollout were mostly rebuffed . The contractors repeatedly said they couldn ’ t provide specific agency employees who made key decisions leading up the launch of a faulty website , though they eventually offered two names – Deputy CIO Henry Chao and COO Michelle Snyder .
Chao , now somewhat infamously , had warned an industry conference in March that he was hoping the federal exchange would offer something better than a “ third-world experience . ”
Committee Republicans also trained their fire on a last-minute CMS decision to turn off HealthCare.gov ’ s “ window shopping ” feature giving consumers the ability to view health plans before registering an account . They claim the CMS decision , which Campbell said was made two weeks before Oct. 1 , was a politically calculated move to hide the cost of Obamacare coverage .
The GOP questioning provided a preview for another round of high-profile hearings next week on the Affordable Care Act ’ s launch . CMS Administrator Marilyn Tavenner is due to testify at the House Ways and Means Committee on Tuesday , and Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius , who declined an invite to Thursday ’ s hearing , will face the Energy and Commerce panel Wednesday .
Republicans at those hearings are likely to focus on the contractors ’ admissions that the feds only started end-to-end testing of all the complex technical systems two weeks before Oct. 1 .
Quality Software Services Inc. ’ s Andrew Slavitt and CGI ’ s Campbell both said their companies normally would have wanted months for comprehensive systems testing . Slavitt also said his company , which built the federal data hub , shared “ all of the risks that we saw ” with CMS ahead of the launch . “ My understanding was that they understood those and were working on it , ” he said .