It ’ s the cardinal rule of marketing management : Under-promise and over-deliver . If the sign at “ Pirates of the Caribbean ” says the wait is 45 minutes , and your kids are floating along on the ride in half that time , Disneyland really is the Happiest Place on Earth .
So it ’ s little wonder that the glaring contrast between the White House ’ s perpetually optimistic talk about its health care plan — “ Try it ! You ’ ll like it ! ” — and the messy realities of its rollout has sent President Barack Obama ’ s job approval ratings to all-time lows , and for the first time left the public with a negative view of his honesty in some surveys .
From the start , the plan was more complex and unpredictable than Obama liked to acknowledge , reliant as it was on the profit-driven market forces of the private insurance industry , individually regulated in all 50 states . And his strategy for selling it was always based on an unspoken assumption that the public could not tolerate such unpleasant truths .
To be fair , the all-out partisan war to pass the bill , and then to defend it in the courts and Congress , was hardly the time for the president to warn , “ This might not work right away , folks . ”
But it is nevertheless Obama ’ s own months of upbeat predictions that have now left a chastened president grappling to restore his credibility , as he did on Thursday by announcing he would allow insurers to extend by a year the substandard plans they recently cancelled to comply with the new law ’ s demands for fuller coverage .
And it remains to be seen whether that attempted fix ( which is voluntary ) will satisfy the millions of Americans at risk of losing their current coverage — or stave off demands from restive Democrats in Congress for a legislative remedy . “ I am confident that by — by the time we look back on this next year , that people are going to say this is working well , and it ’ s helping a lot of people , ” Obama predicted .
( IN 90 SECONDS : Obamacare puts Democrats ’ credibility on the line )
Maybe so . But if not , Obama ’ s latest claim will be just one more unmet expectation to be thrown back in the face of a leader who likes to tell his own worried aides when things are going badly , “ I got this. ” Except when he doesn ’ t .
“ At every single point , they ’ ve over-promised and under-delivered ” on Obamacare , said Matthew Dowd , George W. Bush ’ s former pollster who grew so disillusioned with his old boss ’ s performance that he voted for Obama . “ And at every single point , they ’ ve chosen a short-term communications strategy , as opposed to a long-term governing strategy . And the short-term communication strategy was to put out the fire by saying ‘ It ’ s all going to be OK . ” ’
Daniel Pink , a former speechwriter for Vice President Al Gore and best-selling author of “ To Sell is Human : The Surprising Truth About Moving Others ” and other books on business , said the administration had fallen prey to the age-old reluctance to deliver bad news to those at the top — and then failed to pass that news on to constituents .
“ They ’ ve endured far more long-term pain from their happy talk than they would have short-term pain from telling the truth , ” he said . “ I fear this is going to go into the annals with George H. W. Bush ’ s ‘ no new taxes , ’ and Bill Clinton ’ s ‘ I didn ’ t have sex with that woman. ’ It strikes me as something very sticky . ”
It ’ s hard to know right now where the Obamacare mess falls on the presidential calamity scale . It ’ s by no means clear that the health care debacle will be for Obama what Hurricane Katrina was for the second Bush : a management disaster from which his presidency never recovers . But it ’ s an uncomfortable coincidence that Obama ’ s latest approval rating — hovering around 38 percent — is just where Bush ’ s was at this point in his second term , two months after Katrina devastated New Orleans and the Gulf Coast .
Ronald Reagan ’ s nadir — the Iran-Contra scandal — came later in his second term . His presidency later stabilized after he apologized for denying that he had traded arms for hostages by saying , “ My heart and my best intentions still tell me that ’ s true . But the facts and the evidence tell me it is not . ”
Obama tried a similar — if wordier — mea culpa Thursday with respect to his repeated pledge that people who liked their current insurance plan could keep it , explaining : “ There is no doubt that the way I put that forward unequivocally ended up not being accurate . It was not because of my intention not to deliver on that commitment and that promise . ”
And he repeated that the promise remained true for “ the vast majority of Americans ” who get insurance through their employers , and not in the individual insurance market , where plans change often , pricing is volatile and coverage is spotty . As recently as last week , the White House website itself was still pledging , “ Nothing in the proposal forces anyone to change the insurance they have . Period . ”