President Obama on Saturday offered one of his strongest defenses to date of his signature domestic achievement , lambasting Republican critics of his health care law as obstructionists who are playing politics with the well-being and economic security of millions of Americans .
In blunt terms , Mr. Obama used his weekly address to describe health insurance as a “ right ” and distinguished states that have embraced his law against those that have not .
He said the Affordable Care Act is already helping young adults stay on their parents ’ health plans and offering free preventative care .
“ But there ’ s also a group of Republicans in Congress working hard to confuse people , and making empty promises that they ’ ll either shut down the health care law , or , if they don ’ t get their way , they ’ ll shut down the government , ” he said .
“ Think about that , ” he added . “ They ’ re actually having a debate between hurting Americans who will no longer be denied affordable care just because they ’ ve been sick — and harming the economy and millions of Americans in the process . And many Republicans are more concerned with how badly this debate will hurt them politically than they are with how badly it ’ ll hurt the country . ”
His defense of the law comes less than two months before state-by-state insurance markets , or “ exchanges , ” start to enroll Americans without employer-based insurance who may buy coverage with the help of government subsidies .
Mr. Obama is attempting to counteract critics who say the law ’ s mandates amount to an unprecedented intrusion on Americans personal health care decisions and could cause premiums to soar , as it requires insurers to cover more services and people with pre-existing conditions .
House Republicans have voted roughly 40 times to repeal either all or part of the health care law , and Senate conservatives want to use the upcoming spending debate as leverage in the fight to defund “ Obamacare . ”
“ A lot of Republicans seem to believe that if they can gum up the works and make this law fail , they ’ ll somehow be sticking it to me , ” Mr. Obama said . “ But they ’ d just be sticking it to you … Some even say that if you call their office with questions about the law , they ’ ll refuse to help . Call me old-fashioned — but that ’ s lousy constituent service . And it ’ s not what you deserve. ” \
He said states like California , New York , Colorado and Maryland are revealing the true potential of his law , because they embraced it from the start .
“ So I ’ m going to keep doing everything in my power to make sure this law works as it ’ s supposed to , ” he said . “ Because in the United States of America , health insurance isn ’ t a privilege — it is your right . And we ’ re going to keep it that way . ”