Higher costs , fewer choices , and less access to care are just some of the symptoms many Americans will suffer from as Obamacare is implemented . The Heritage Foundation 's Alyene Senger explains in the January issue of ███ Magazine .
More than three years after passage of the Affordable Care Act ( aka , Obamacare ) , most Americans still lack a good understanding of what the law does and how it will affect them . In large measure , that is due to the sheer complexity of the law and the fact that its major pieces are only now beginning to take effect . That complexity is also the root cause of many of the technical problems the federal government is facing in implementing the law , with those technical problems creating , in turn , even greater public confusion and anxiety .
The politically “ popular provisions ” ( such as , so-called “ free ” preventive care , covering 26-year-old “ children ” on their parents ’ plans , and expanding Medicare prescription drug benefits ) took effect first—prior to the 2012 election . But these provisions are nearly inconsequential compared to the damaging Obamacare components slated to take full effect in January 2014 .
That ’ s when a new and completely unsustainable subsidy program takes hold via the government exchanges . It ’ s also when Obamacare expands the broken Medicaid program to take in millions of new patients , and when Americans start paying for most of the nearly $ 1.8 trillion in new entitlement spending with massive tax hikes and unprecedented cuts to the Medicare program .
The results of these intertwining provisions will profoundly change the U.S. health care system and will undoubtedly produce lasting negative effects for a majority of Americans , regardless of the source of their health care coverage . Many Americans will see higher costs , fewer choices for coverage and less access to doctors and hospitals .
The key vehicle used by Obamacare to radically transform and standardize health insurance in the U.S. is the creation of government health insurance exchanges . These exchanges were created to sell and subsidize standardized government-approved health care plans . Most of those who acquire coverage through the exchanges will have their costs subsidized by federal taxpayers . In 34 states , the federal government will be in charge of running the exchange .
Sixteen states , plus the District of Columbia , have elected to run their own state exchange . Open enrollment in the exchanges began on October 1 . Coverage for enrollees kicks in beginning January 1 , 2014 .
Plans are offered in metal tiers : bronze , silver , gold , and platinum . Bronze plans will have the lowest premium , but highest cost sharing , and the reverse will be true of platinum plans . Those under age 30 can also purchase so-called catastrophic plans .
While there is some variance from state to state , every plan sold on the exchanges must offer a new “ essential health benefits package ” —an extensive level of benefits drawn from 10 different benefit categories .
With these built-in benefit mandates , insurers are unlikely to offer additional benefits . Doing so would further increase the price of their products compared to their competitors . In essence , the benefit floor created by Obamacare is likely to also become a benefit ceiling . The result is that meaningful differences among health plans can be hard to come by at the benefits level .
These benefit mandates are combined with new insurance rules inside and outside the exchanges that take full effect in 2014 . These include :
Unrestricted guaranteed issue , meaning no one can be denied coverage due to a pre-existing condition , even if they didn ’ t have previous coverage . ( Of course , to avoid people waiting until they are sick to buy coverage , Obamacare added the infamous individual mandate to coerce healthy people to join Obamacare now . )
No medical underwriting , meaning an insurer can not vary premiums based on health condition .
Community rating , which essentially forces insurers to charge younger adults artificially higher premiums by limiting the variation in premiums between the young and old . ( The natural variation in medical costs runs at about 1:5 . Obamacare sets the ratio at 1:3 )
Prohibition of annual and lifetime limits on benefits . This provision has been gradually phasing in . The limits will be fully phased out on January 1 , 2014 . ( At that time , any waivers for plans with such limits will expire , and 4 million people in plans that got waivers will lose their existing coverage . )
These new rules and mandates create a one-size-fits-all insurance model . Unfortunately , millions of policies previously sold do not fit this model . As a result , millions of Americans have lost—or are at risk of losing their health plan .
Starting in 2014 , the government will subsidize premiums for coverage purchased through the Exchange by individuals earning from 100 percent to 400 percent of the federal poverty level ( FPL ) . For individuals , that income range is between $ 11,490 and $ 45,960 in 2013 . For a family of four , the income range is between $ 23,550 and $ 94,200 . The subsidies are applied on a sliding scale with the lower income participants receiving higher amounts .
In addition to premium subsidies , cost-sharing subsidies are available to those who purchase a silver plan in the Exchange and earn between 100 and 250 percent of FPL . These cost-sharing subsidies will offset enrollees ’ out-of-pocket expenses .
The heavy subsidies are expected to draw more and more people to the exchanges . In May 2013 , the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) estimated 7 million people would obtain coverage through the exchanges in 2014 . By 2023 , the CBO projected 24 million to obtain coverage there , with 19 million receiving subsidies . The CBO estimates that together , the subsidies will cost taxpayers almost $ 1.1 trillion from 2014-2023 .
The main effect of these Obamacare provisions is a lack of competition , reduced consumer choice , and increased costs in the exchanges . Just the opposite of what the president promised .
The standardization of benefits inherently limits choice but this is combined with a lack of insurer competition , further reducing choices for Obamacare consumers . A county-level analysis of insurers participating in the state exchanges shows that 17 percent of the nation ’ s counties will have no choice—only one insurer is offering coverage to residents there . More than a third ( 35 percent ) of all counties have only two carriers to choose from . Another 26 percent are being offered coverage from only three carriers . Thus , three out of four counties in America will only have three insurance options through Obamacare . A lack of insurer competition not only reduces choice , it also reduces pressure on insurers to keep costs down .
Obamacare ’ s many onerous provisions have led to significant premium increases for most consumers in a majority of states . A Heritage Foundation analysis found that 42 of the 47 states for which comparable premium data are available will see significant average premium increases—in many cases , over 100 percent— for individuals purchasing from the exchanges .
A common way for insurers to mitigate premium increases is to reduce the scope of their provider networks . As a result , major hospitals are being excluded in some exchanges , and many exchange customers are finding that their doctor isn ’ t in their exchange plan ’ s network .
For instance , the Los Angeles Times reports that “ a major insurer in the state run market , Blue Shield of California , said its exchange customers will be restricted to 36 % of its regular physician network statewide . ”
Another major piece of Obamacare is an expansion of Medicaid to individuals earning up to 138 percent of the FPL , an annual income of $ 15,856 in 2013 .
The law promises that our already broke federal government will fund the Medicaid expansion population at 100 percent for the next three years , gradually reducing reimbursement to 90 percent in 2020 and thereafter . The CBO expects a partial expansion to cost $ 710 billion over the next decade . Those states that have opted to expand their programs will see their Medicaid rolls start to swell in January . The administration ’ s fight to get the rest of the states to expand will rage on .
Originally the law stated that , if a state refused to expand its Medicaid program , the federal government would take back its matching funds for the entire program .
But in June 2012 , the Supreme Court deemed that provision to be coercive and ruled that the federal government could not withhold all its funding to states that chose not to expand , it could only withhold the expansion funding .
Prior to Obamacare , Medicaid traditionally covered low-income mothers and children , as well as low-income disabled and elderly . Obamacare ’ s blanket expansion includes anyone with income up to 138 percent of the FPL . If every state expands its program , as many as 25 million additional people could enroll in Medicaid by 2021—most of them childless adults .
Thus far , only 25 states have agreed to the massive expansion . The rest are weighing their options . The 25 states that have not yet bought into the expansion are under intense pressure from hospital lobbyists to do so . The administration , too , shaken by the dismal enrollment figures in the exchanges , has recently stepped up its efforts to “ shame ” governors into expansion .
Medicaid beneficiaries already find it difficult to access care . A major reason is due to low physician participation rates . Sandra L. Decker , an economist at the National Center for Health Statistics , found that in 2011 , one of three primary care physicians would not accept new Medicaid patients . And it ’ s no secret why . Medicaid typically reimburses doctors at rates below paid by private insurance plans . In 2008 , Medicaid reimbursement was little more than half ( about 58 percent ) that provided by private plans .
Although Obamacare provides a federal funding boost for Medicaid primary care physicians , reimbursement levels are likely to trend back down . For one thing , the federal boost is only to Medicare reimbursement levels which are still below private insurance rates—about 80 percent . For another , the increase in Medicaid reimbursements is only temporary , ending after 2014 .
Instead of reforming a program that is already failing the most-vulnerable in our society , Obamacare expands it , worsening the problem .
New Taxes , Mandates , and Fees Obamacare contains 18 specific tax hikes , mandates or penalties estimated to raise a total of $ 771 billion in new revenue from 2013-2022 . All but four of these are already in effect , and three more will take hold in 2014 . Total tax revenue from Obamacare is estimated to be almost $ 32 billion in 2014 .
Included in this list are the individual mandate and the employer mandate . The Supreme Court upheld the individual mandate as a constitutional exercise of Congress ’ s power to tax , yet it remains wildly unpopular . It is designed to coerce individuals into purchasing government approved health insurance or face a tax penalty . The penalty will start in 2014— based on either $ 95 or one percent of annual income , whichever is greater . However , nearly all those subject to pay it will pay the latter ( one percent of income ) amount because individuals with an annual income of only $ 9,500 or less would likely qualify for Medicaid or a hardship exemption .
The employer mandate forces all employers with 50 or more full-time employees ( defined as those working 30 hours per week ) to either offer coverage the government deems affordable and adequate or pay a penalty . The penalty varies—either $ 2,000 per employee after the first 30 workers , or $ 3,000 per employee receiving subsidized coverage in the exchange , whichever is less .
The Obama administration has delayed the enforcement of the employer mandate until 2015 , but it was done administratively rather than through legislative action . Thus many in the business community are still confused— since the law says one thing and the administration says another . Regardless , plenty of businesses have already adapted by reducing hours for their employees to fall under the hourly threshold .
The health insurer tax , one of the bigger taxes included in the law , is an annual fee on health insurance plans . This tax is based on each individual company ’ s share of the market and is estimated to raise $ 101.7 billion from 2014-2023 , including $ 8 billion in 2014 alone . While the insurance industry is actively trying to delay the tax , it is sure to have a huge effect on premiums next year and thereafter . An actuarial analysis by the consulting firm Oliver Wyman shows that in 2014 , this tax will increase premiums by 1.9 to 2.3 percent . And the impact will be far greater in later years .
Another large fee to help pay for Obamacare is a reinsurance fee , which isn ’ t even included in the list of 18 taxes . The temporary fee is assessed on group health plans to help spread the cost of the covering those in the exchanges . The fee is going to be $ 63 per covered life in 2014 . Like most taxes and fees , the result will likely be higher premiums .
Seniors in Medicare are also hit by the Obamacare spending spree . Obamacare includes a host of across-the-board Medicare spending cuts , totaling $ 41 billion in 2014 and more than $ 700 billion by 2022 . Contrary to the way these cuts are often portrayed , they are not being used to shore up the Medicare program and are not aimed at specific instances of waste , fraud , and abuse .
Seniors , access to care will be compromised if these draconian cuts take place . The Medicare Trustees project that 15 percent of all hospitals , hospices , nursing homes , and home health agencies would become unprofitable within five years . As the Trustees go on to explain :
“ Medicare ’ s payments for health services would fall increasingly below providers ’ costs . Providers could not sustain continuing negative margins and would have to withdraw from serving Medicare beneficiaries or ( if total facility margins remained positive ) shift substantial portions of Medicare costs to their non-Medicare , non-Medicaid payers . ”
In fact , Obamacare ’ s initial Medicare payment changes are already having an effect on seniors ’ access to care . UnitedHealth , the nation ’ s largest provider of Medicare Advantage plans , announced in November that thousands of doctors would be dropped from their network thanks to lower reimbursement payments due to Obamacare . “ It ’ s no secret that we are under substantial funding pressure from the federal government , ” UnitedHealth President Austin Pittman told the Wall Street Journal .
As Obamacare ’ s payment reductions intensify in the coming years , so will the damage they wreak among health care providers and facilities . This can only increase the severity of barriers to care confronting America ’ s seniors .
Obamacare ’ s new entitlements are kicking into high gear at a time when the nation rapidly approaches a fiscal crisis . The national debt has surpassed $ 17 trillion , and government spending is on track to exceed revenues in 2014 by 18 percent . Existing entitlement programs , desperately in need of reform , are largely to blame for this untenable situation .
While the U.S. health care system certainly needed reform before Obamacare , the Affordable Care Act exacerbates pre-existing flaws and creates new problems . Americans can ’ t afford the cost of Obamacare or its harmful impact on access to quality health care .