WASHINGTON -- Sen. Rand Paul , R-Ky. , says he and three other GOP senators oppose the health bill as written , putting passage in jeopardy .
Paul , Ted Cruz , R-Texas , Mike Lee , R-Utah , and Ron Johnson , R-Wis. , expressed concerns that the measure does n't go far enough in dismantling Obama 's signature health care law .
`` Currently , for a variety of reasons , we are not ready to vote for this bill , but we are open to negotiation and obtaining more information before it is brought to the floor , '' they said in a joint statement said . `` There are provisions in this draft that represent an improvement to our current health care system , but it does not appear this draft as written will accomplish the most important promise that we made to Americans : to repeal Obamacare and lower their health care costs . ''
That news came as Senate Republican leaders released their new plan Thursday to dismantle Obamacare as insurance companies pull out from more states in the unsustainable health care exchanges .
They say their proposal would cut Medicaid , end penalties for people not buying insurance , and erase tax increases that former President Barack Obama imposed .
Also , unlike the House version of the legislation , the Senate plan would do away with waivers allowing states to let insurers hike premiums on some people with pre-existing conditions .
Moreover , it would provide tax credits based on income , making more funds available to lower-income recipients . Tax credits under the House-approved bill were tied to people 's ages , something the Congressional Budget Office said would drive up out-of-pocket costs for many lower earners .
With the Capitol Hill battle over health care ratcheting up , President Donald Trump called Democrats `` obstructionists '' at an Iowa rally Wednesday .
`` If we went and got the single greatest health care plan in the history of the world we would not get one Democrat vote because they 're obstructionists . They 're obstructionists , '' he charged .
Senate GOP leaders are hoping to push the measure through the chamber next week .
`` We have to act , '' Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , R-Ky. said on the Senate floor , `` because Obamacare is a direct attack on the middle class , and American families deserve better than its failing status quo . ''
This week brought new evidence that the Obamacare insurance markets are collapsing . Competition in many markets has dwindled to one insurer , or none in some cases .
Blue Cross-Blue Shield insurer Anthem said Wednesday it will leave exchanges in Wisconsin and its home state of Indiana . This comes a few weeks after the nation 's second-largest insurer also said it was completely pulling out of Ohio 's exchange .
The Associated Press reports early plans filed by many insurers for next year include premium increases well over 20 percent , and Avalere expects more than 40 percent of U.S. counties to have only one insurer selling coverage on the exchange .
Right now , some counties in Missouri , Ohio , Indiana and Washington have zero health care options on the Obamacare exchange for next year .