Subscribe to the whole series via our free weekly Politics newsletter and follow us on Twitter @ CSM_politics . Review the previous seven installments , from guns to illegal immigration , here .
Obamacare 's ups and downs , as seen by a Republican doctor
Daniel Derksen , who drafted part of Obamacare , has had a front seat to the implosion of Arizona 's private insurance marketplace . But as a rural health expert , he also sees how it 's helped .
Francine Kiefer/The ███ Daniel Derksen , director of the Center for Rural Health at the University of Arizona in Tucson , stands outside of his office on Oct. 4 .
Daniel Derksen knows only too well how polarizing Obamacare can be .
In 2012 , he was leading an effort to build a health insurance marketplace for New Mexico under the new law . The state ’ s Republican governor , Susana Martinez , and Dr. Derksen – also a Republican – were committed to standing up a robust , competitive marketplace that would be run by the state , not the federal government .
Initially , things went pretty smoothly for this family physician and health-policy expert . Derksen , who had actually drafted part of the Affordable Care Act , had secured a first round of federal funding for the state ’ s marketplace exchange . He was readying his proposal for a second round of funding .
But as the Supreme Court moved toward a landmark ruling on the constitutionality of the law , conservative critics in the governor ’ s administration began to question him . With tensions mounting , Dersken handed his funding proposal to New Mexico ’ s secretary of human services .
“ Obamacare ’ s not coming in the door , ” said the secretary , throwing his proposal on the floor and storming out of the room , according to Derksen .
Given the polarizing nature of the Affordable Care Act , aka “ Obamacare , ” it ’ s not surprising that the two main presidential candidates have opposite takes on it . Here ’ s a review of the law and what could happen with it .
The Obama administration announced Monday that consumers who buy private insurance under the law ’ s federal marketplace exchange will face an average 25 percent increase in premiums for a benchmark “ silver ” plan , though most people will qualify for tax credit subsidies to help pay for the price hike . It ’ s increasingly clear that the next president will have to address the instability of the federal exchanges .
The premium increases follow the exit of big private insurers and co-ops from many of the exchanges set up under Obamacare . Analysts cite several reasons for the insurer exits , including inexperience with the marketplaces , the end of certain federal support for the insurance companies , and an imbalance among those covered : too many sick participants , not enough young , healthy ones . That has been costly for private insurance companies , who have cited hundreds of millions of dollars in losses .
Also see The Upshot 's interactive map of where uninsured Americans live within the US at the county-level .
Not a single Republican voted for the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) , which a Democrat-controlled Congress passed in March 2010 . Two years later , conservatives challenged the law 's constitutionality in a landmark Supreme Court case , NFIB v. Sebelius . The case focused on the law ’ s requirement to sign up for a minimum level of health insurance or pay a financial penalty , known as the individual mandate .
The main question was : Does the constitution give Congress the authority to establish such a requirement ? The court examined two provisions under which Congress could claim this authority : the power to collect taxes and to regulate commerce between states . Both are found in Article 1 , Section 8 of the Constitution .
The first clause , about taxes , seems relatively straightforward : “ The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes , duties , imposts and excises , to pay the debts and provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United States ; but all duties , imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the United States… ”
The third clause , known as the Commerce Clause , gives Congress the authority to “ regulate commerce … among the several states. ” Essentially this gets to the debate over the balance of power between federal and state government , as Cornell ’ s Legal Information Institute explains .
In its June 2012 decision , the Supreme Court determined that the Commerce Clause did not provide legal justification for compelling Americans to buy a minimum level of health insurance or else face a financial penalty .
“ The individual mandate… does not regulate existing commercial activity . It instead compels individuals to become active in commerce by purchasing a product , on the ground that their failure to do so affects interstate commerce , ” the ruling read . “ Construing the Commerce Clause to permit Congress to regulate individuals precisely because they are doing nothing would open a new and potentially vast domain to congressional authority . ”
However , the court upheld the individual mandate , but for a different reason : it argued that the financial penalty amounted to a tax and thus fell within the bounds of Congress 's constitutional authority .
`` In this case … it is reasonable to construe what Congress has done as increasing taxes on those who have a certain amount of income , but choose to go without health insurance . Such legislation is within Congress ’ s power to tax , '' the ruling read .
Subsequent Supreme Court cases challenged other aspects of the law , including whether it violates the religious liberty of employers opposed to providing contraception .
Sources : the Jill Stein campaign , the Hillary Clinton campaign website , Reuters , MSNBC , the Donald Trump campaign website , ProCon.org , Fox News , Donald Trump 's Twitter account , Politico , ISideWith.com , Ballotpedia , CNN
Look at health care from different perspectives and discuss with people who agree and disagree with you .
J. Scott Applewhite/AP In this March 23 , 2010 , file photo , President Barack Obama signs the health care bill in the East Room of the White House in Washington . With the nation still divided over `` Obamacare , '' President Barack Obama is laying out a blueprint for addressing unsolved problems with his signature health law , including a renewed call for a `` public option '' to let Americans buy insurance from the government .
1 . How much do you know about health care reform ? Take our quiz .
After surviving a shaky legislative birth , significant public opposition , and legal challenges that went all the way to the US Supreme Court , President Obama ’ s signature achievement , comprehensive health-care reform , went into effect in 2014 . How well do you know the reform law and the underlying issues ?
2 . 'Between Two Ferns ' and the 8 wackiest Obamacare ads targeting Millennials
The program is complex and its benefits are difficult to reduce to a sound bite . So several advocacy groups ditched traditional messaging and created attention-getting , even wacky marketing campaigns in the hopes of generating social media buzz and getting more young adults to sign up for insurance . Here are some of the stranger pro- and anti-Obamacare ads targeting Millennials .
The rollout was so rushed that , even after the launch , the site 's computer code still had placeholder language , tech experts say . The site also did not have the capacity to handle the flood of visitors it received , making it operate slowly and crash often . Here are five questions about what happened after the launch on October 1 , 2013 .
Get the Monitor Stories you care about delivered to your inbox . By signing up , you agree to our Privacy Policy
1 . `` Football Team at the Buffet : Why Obamacare Markets Are in Crisis , '' The New York Times
… many of the most important problems can be understood if you think of an Obamacare marketplace as a particular kind of restaurant : an all-you-can-eat buffet… . The appeal of your business — and the risk — is that all people pay the same price , whatever their appetite . That is fine if you charge $ 15 and feeding the average customer costs $ 10 . But you can be in deep trouble if your buffet suddenly becomes the favorite hangout of the high school football team . Once a bunch of growing teenage athletes start dropping by after practice , they can ruin your business . Those very hungry customers will pay $ 15 , while eating $ 40 worth of food .
2 . `` 11 mind-blowing facts about American health care dysfunction , '' Vox ( video )
One in every six dollars in the US gets spent on health care .
An estimated 210,00 patients are killed annually by medical errors – that ’ s the equivalent of 10 jumbo jets crashing every week .
3 . `` America ’ s Bitter Pill , '' a New York Times review of the 2015 book by Steven Brill
In Brill ’ s account of the Affordable Care Act , the insurers got a fair shake , uninsured and underinsured patients truly benefited , hospitals and pharmaceutical companies and medical equipment companies were left free to charge exorbitant prices , while the general public was left with no real strategy for cost containment . In other words , Brill is impressed with the expanded coverage provided by Obama­care , and depressed about the cost of care . Despite the cynical title , this is a surprisingly triumphant book .
4 . `` Selling Sickness : How Drug Ads Changed Health Care , '' NPR
Prescription drug spending is the third most expensive cost in our health care system… . In a decade and a half , the use of prescription medication went up 71 percent . This has added about $ 180 billion to our medical spending… . It used to work like this : Doctors decided what to prescribe . Drug companies — through medical advertisers — tried to influence doctors . Patients did what they were told… . Today , drug companies spend $ 4 billion a year on ads to consumers… . The Nielsen Co. estimates that there 's an average of 80 drug ads every hour of every day on American television . And those ads clearly produce results… By taking their case to patients instead of doctors , drug companies increased the amount of money we spend on medicine in America .
5 . `` Our diagnosis as doctors – ObamaCare is about to collapse , '' by three MDs who are Republican members of Congress , Fox News
The dwindling number of ObamaCare supporters repeatedly point to the fact that 20 million more Americans have coverage now than before ObamaCare . The vast majority of those 20 million , however , have been dropped into a failing Medicaid program… . It is a top-down system that has Washington dictating terms to the states that ignore the diverse needs of communities across this country . That is not a recipe for success , and studies have shown that Medicaid ’ s impact on the health status of enrollees is negligible . Regardless , 31 states expanded their Medicaid programs under Obamacare . However , it is not going as promised . According to Dr. Brian Blase at the Mercatus Center , there are 50 percent more enrollees at a cost of 50 percent more per person than originally projected . These massive , unanticipated costs will only become more unaffordable in the coming years .
6 . `` Where Clinton Will Take Obama Care , '' op-ed by Phil Gramm , the Wall Street Journal