Democrats are heading toward a new phase in the battle over healthcare as they brace for a tough midterm election cycle .
With the GOP 's ObamaCare repeal push largely on ice , Democrats are shifting their focus from defending the Affordable Care Act to pitching their own healthcare ideas .
The long-shot proposals have little chance of passing with Republicans in control of both chambers of Congress and the White House .
But the competing measures could feed into the ongoing fight about the party ’ s future as Democrats search for a path out of the political wilderness .
Sen. Bernie Sanders Bernie SandersUkraine whistleblower coverage has n't impacted Biden favorability : poll Saagar Enjeti calls Warren 's credibility into question Krystal Ball : Potential Ocasio-Cortez endorsement of Sanders would be ' a no-brainer ' MORE ( I-Vt. ) is expected to unveil a `` Medicare for All ” bill next month , using the August break to build momentum for the forthcoming legislation .
“ Establishing a Medicare for All single-payer program will improve the health of the American people and provide substantial financial savings for middle class families . It is the right thing to do . It is the moral thing to do , ” Sanders wrote in a Guardian op-ed .
Echoing his upstart presidential campaign last year , the Vermont senator is asking supporters to sign up as a “ citizen co-sponsor ” of the forthcoming legislation , arguing that it ’ s time “ to wage a moral and political war against a dysfunctional healthcare system . ”
Sanders put universal healthcare at the center of his bid for the Democratic nomination , and the idea has gained traction amid a progressive resurgence within the party .
Many of Sanders ’ s potential opponents in a 2020 presidential primary — including Democratic Sens . Kamala Harris ( Calif. ) and Cory Booker Cory Anthony BookerKrystal Ball : Potential Ocasio-Cortez endorsement of Sanders would be ' a no-brainer ' Poll : Biden leads 2020 Democratic field by 11 points in North Carolina Booker meets fundraising goal , will stay in presidential race MORE ( N.J. ) — have voiced some support for a government operated healthcare system . Sen. Elizabeth Warren Elizabeth Ann WarrenOvernight Health Care : Dem seeks changes to Pelosi drug pricing bill | Trump officials shift family planning funds from Planned Parenthood | CVS halts sales of Zantac over cancer concerns Saagar Enjeti calls Warren 's credibility into question Krystal Ball : Potential Ocasio-Cortez endorsement of Sanders would be ' a no-brainer ' MORE ( D-Mass . ) told The Wall Street Journal that “ it ’ s time for the next step . And the next step is single-payer . ”
Marissa Barrow , a spokeswoman for the Progressive Change Campaign Committee , said Democrats should embrace a “ big and bold ” agenda heading into the next election .
“ We ’ re looking to make Medicare for all one of the big issues on the campaign trail , ” she said . “ We see it as an issue that could help unite the Democratic Party . ”
But Sanders ’ s Senate colleagues who are running in red states have kept the proposal at arm 's length .
Democratic Sens . Joe Manchin Joseph ( Joe ) ManchinOn The Money : Senate confirms Scalia as Labor chief | Bill with B in wall funding advanced over Democrats ' objections | Lawyers reach deal to delay enforcement of NY tax return subpoena Bill with billion in wall funding advanced over Democrats ' objections Impeachment threatens derailment of congressional agenda MORE ( W.Va. ) , Joe Donnelly Joseph ( Joe ) Simon DonnellyLobbying world Trump nominees meet fiercest opposition from Warren , Sanders , Gillibrand GOP frets over nightmare scenario for Senate primaries MORE ( Ind . ) , Jon Tester Jonathan ( Jon ) TesterOvernight Energy : Lawmakers show irritation over withheld Interior documents | Republican offers bipartisan carbon tax bill | Scientists booted from EPA panel form new group Senate Democrats hesitant to go all-in on impeachment probe Overnight Defense — Presented by Huntington Ingalls Industries — Impeachment inquiry overshadows Trump at UN | Veterans push VA to follow through on reforms | Iranian leader open to changes in nuke deal MORE ( Mont . ) and Heidi Heitkamp Mary ( Heidi ) Kathryn HeitkampThe Hill 's Morning Report — Biden steadies in third debate as top tier remains the same Trump wins 60 percent approval in rural areas of key states Pence to push new NAFTA deal in visit to Iowa MORE ( N.D. ) , as well as Independent Sen. Angus King Angus Stanley KingOvernight Defense : Dems grill Trump Army , Air Force picks | House chair subpoenas Trump Afghanistan negotiator | Trump officials release military aid to Ukraine Democrats grill Army , Air Force nominees on military funding for border wall Bipartisan panel to issue recommendations for defending US against cyberattacks early next year MORE ( Maine ) , joined with Republicans to vote against a single-payer amendment from GOP Sen. Steve Daines ( Mont . ) late last month .
Heitkamp said Congress needs “ realistic solutions ” and that Daines ’ s maneuver — which was expected to fail — was a “ political stunt . ”
“ We need realistic solutions to help fix our healthcare system . ... The decision was made in 2010 to go with a market-based system — the question is how we improve the system we have , ” Heitkamp said in a statement .
Sen. Claire McCaskill Claire Conner McCaskillEx-CIA chief worries campaigns falling short on cybersecurity Ocasio-Cortez blasts NYT editor for suggesting Tlaib , Omar are n't representative of Midwest Trump nominees meet fiercest opposition from Warren , Sanders , Gillibrand MORE ( D-Mo . ) , who like most Democrats voted “ present ” on the GOP amendment , also told constituents she would not support a single-payer proposal .
“ I ’ m going to disappoint a lot of you . ... I would say if a single-payer came up to a vote right now I would not vote for it , ” McCaskill , who is up for reelection next year , told constituents during a town hall earlier this year .
McCaskill added she would support allowing individuals who only have one option on the ObamaCare exchanges to buy into Medicare or Medicaid instead .
Democrats face a tough Senate map in 2018 , with 10 senators running for reelection in states carried by Trump . The nonpartisan Cook Political Report shifted three of those races — West Virginia , Indiana and Missouri — to “ toss up ” and North Dakota from “ likely D ” to “ lean D ” this week .
A spokesman for Sanders said he didn ’ t yet have an estimate for how many members of the Democratic conference would support the forthcoming legislation . One hundred and sixteen House Democrats are backing a separate House bill from Rep. John Conyers ( D-Mich. ) — the first time a majority of the House Democratic Caucus has supported the proposal .
Democratic leadership is trying to walk a fine line in the looming healthcare fight as they balance the competing interests of different wings of the party .
Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer ( D-N.Y. ) has put myriad options , including single payer , “ on the table . ”
“ We 're going to look at broader things — single payer is one of them , ” he told ABC News . “ Medicare for people above 55 is on the table . A buy-in to Medicare is on the table . A buy-in to Medicaid is on the table . ”
Overall , 33 percent of Americans believe healthcare should be a “ single payer ” setup , according to a Pew Research Center poll from late June , compared to 52 percent of Democrats and 64 percent of liberals .
The poll also found that roughly 60 percent believe the government is responsible for making sure all Americans have health insurance .
The coming fight over healthcare is the latest example of a vocal progressive wing trying to flex its muscle and push the Democratic Party to the left in the wake of the 2016 presidential election .
When Sanders introduced a bill to raise the federal minimum wage to $ 15 — a key issue between himself and primary opponent Hillary Clinton Hillary Diane Rodham ClintonClinton jokes she 'never ' had to tell Obama not to 'extort foreign countries ' Krystal Ball : Potential Ocasio-Cortez endorsement of Sanders would be ' a no-brainer ' Trump asked Australian leader to help look into Mueller probe 's origins : report MORE — 30 Democratic senators signed on to the bill , compared to five supporters for a similar bill in 2015 .
But red-state incumbents aren ’ t the only Democrats worried about embracing single payer .
Sen. Dianne Feinstein Dianne Emiel FeinsteinOvernight Energy : USDA unable to release reports after researchers leave | Trump officials spent over M in fees to keep parks open during shutdown | Green groups sue Trump over vehicle emissions rule Feinstein requests probe into Trump EPA threat to withhold California highway funds ███ 's 12:30 Report : Pelosi attacks Barr over Ukraine call MORE ( D-Calif. ) received pushback at a town hall in San Francisco when she said told constituents that she wasn ’ t “ there ” on single payer .
Asked if he could support a single-payer system , Sen. Tim Kaine Timothy ( Tim ) Michael KaineSchumer : Transcript 'absolutely validates ' Trump impeachment inquiry Democrats hit Scalia over LGBTQ rights Missouri Republican wins annual craft brewing competition for lawmakers MORE ( D-Va. ) , Clinton ’ s vice presidential pick , noted Sanders would be introducing a bill but that he has “ a different view about what we ought to do . ”
“ I want people to have more options , not fewer . ... I would like to explore a circumstance under which there could be a public option , like a Medicare Part E for everybody that you 'd have to buy into , ” Kaine , who is also up for reelection next year , told ABC News earlier this month .
Democratic Sens . Debbie Stabenow Deborah ( Debbie ) Ann StabenowUSDA nixes release of multiple reports over researcher exodus Schumer throws support behind Pelosi impeachment inquiry Senate Democrats hesitant to go all-in on impeachment probe MORE ( Mich. ) , Tammy Baldwin Tammy Suzanne BaldwinFederal funding for Chinese buses risks our national security Democrats threaten to withhold defense votes over wall The Trump downturn : Trouble ahead for the US economy MORE ( Wis. ) and Sherrod Brown Sherrod Campbell BrownOvernight Energy : Lawmakers show irritation over withheld Interior documents | Republican offers bipartisan carbon tax bill | Scientists booted from EPA panel form new group Bipartisan housing finance reform on the road less taken Hillicon Valley : Google to promote original reporting | Senators demand answers from Amazon on worker treatment | Lawmakers weigh response to ransomware attacks MORE ( Ohio ) , who are each up for reelection in states carried by Trump , are offering legislation that let Americans between the ages of 55 and 64 buy into Medicare .
Barrow called the move a “ positive step , ” though the end game is either a single-payer system or a state-by-state or federal Medicare option for everyone .
Sanders has also acknowledged that with Republicans in control of Congress , his bill is unlikely to pass . He outlined three steps to take in the meantime : passing legislation to get the public option in every state , lowering Medicaid eligibility to 55 and lowering the cost of prescription drugs .
But he is also prepared to take his argument for a broader single payer bill into Trump territory . He ’ ll hit the road with stops in Indiana , Ohio and Michigan to discuss healthcare and the economy , including a rally with Conyers where they ’ re expected to discuss Medicare for all .
Barrow added that the Progressive Change Campaign Committee is already reaching out Capitol Hill offices and will keep up their effort through 2018 and beyond to get Democrats to “ wrap themselves in the flag of Medicare . ”
“ If you go into a red state … it ’ s a super , super popular program in red states , blue states and purple states , ” she said . “ It ’ s going to be a winning issue in 2018 especially in those red and purple states . ”