Marco Rubio , Ted Cruz and Rand Paul have all joined the push to defund the law . | AP Photos GOP feuds over Obamacare tactics
A brewing Republican versus Republican fight over whether to use a government funding measure to choke off Obamacare is splitting the party ahead of this fall ’ s budget battles .
A growing number of Republicans are rejecting calls from leading conservatives , including Sens . Marco Rubio , Ted Cruz and Rand Paul , to defund the president ’ s health care law in the resolution to keep the government running past Sept. 30 . The rift exposes an emerging divide over how the GOP can best achieve its No . 1 goal — to repeal Obamacare — while highlighting the spreading fears that Republicans would lose a public relations war if the dispute leads to a government shutdown in the fall .
The debate is happening behind closed doors and over Senate lunches , as well as during a frank meeting Wednesday with House leaders in Speaker John Boehner ’ s suite where fresh concerns were aired about the party ’ s strategy . On Thursday , the dispute began to spill into public view , most notably when three Senate Republicans — including Minority Whip John Cornyn — withdrew their signatures from a conservative letter demanding defunding Obamacare as a condition for supporting the government funding measure .
Sen. Richard Burr ( R-N.C. ) called the push to defund the law through the continuing resolution the “ dumbest idea ” he had ever heard .
“ Defunding the Affordable Care Act is not achievable by shutting down the federal government , ” Burr said . “ At some point , you ’ re going to open the federal government back up , and Barack Obama is going to be president . ”
Sen. Mike Lee ( R-Utah ) and Rep. Mark Meadows ( R-N.C. ) have circulated letters in the Senate and House to push their colleagues to unite behind the anti-Obamacare effort . The proponents of the push argue that if the government shuts down over Obamacare , it will be the president ’ s fault — not theirs .
“ I see it as Obama is threatening to shut down the government unless we fund Obamacare , ” Rubio said .
While the push has won the support of the GOP trio eyeing a White House run — Rubio , Cruz and Paul — the fight also has given the Florida Republican an opportunity to cater to the right after his star dimmed in the eyes of many conservatives for cutting a deal to pass a Senate immigration bill .
Indeed , Rubio seems to be relishing this fight that ’ s firing up the GOP base .
“ I would say , ‘ If we ’ re not going to have a red line in the sand on Obamacare , what will we have a line in the sand on ? ’ ” Rubio told ███ on Thursday . “ For those who are saying it ’ s not achievable , I would say to them , ‘ If it ’ s not achievable it ’ s because they are basically conceding defeat before they even try . ’ ”
After recapturing the House majority in the 2010 midterms , Republicans were emboldened to cut spending , using must-pass government funding bills and debt ceiling increases as their leverage . But their steep demands for cuts quickly ran into political reality — namely the Democratic Senate and the White House — and the House and Senate leadership have made a series of compromises that have angered rank-and-file conservatives .
With the fall spending fights nearing and the White House struggling to implement the health care law , conservatives say now is the time to fight and force Democrats to bend to their will . But funding the health care law is hardly the only disagreement . Senate Democrats and House Republicans are tens of billions of dollars apart on their government funding targets .
Nonetheless , Rubio , Lee and other conservative lawmakers have begun to make the case that if Republicans back a budget bill that includes funding for Obamacare , they essentially are supporting the law .
“ They will choose to fund it and thereby , become part of the legislative process of Obamacare ’ s implementation , but I ’ m not going to , ” Lee said Thursday .
Such comments have irked a number of Republicans , virtually all of whom have called for the law ’ s repeal .
“ That ’ s not true because a good portion of it is mandatory spending , and the only way you get rid of mandatory spending if you want to defund Obamacare is 67 votes because you got to override a presidential veto , ” said Oklahoma Sen. Tom Coburn , a fellow conservative . “ So that ’ s not an accurate assessment . ”
Coburn called the conservative effort a “ failed strategy ” since “ backbones don ’ t hold long ” after a government shuts down , and he said it ’ s a political loser .
“ My feeling is if you want to make sure that the Democrats take control of the House , run that strategy , ” Coburn said .
Similarly , Cornyn said he disagrees with the assessment that supporting a budget bill with Obamacare funding is the same as supporting the law .