The Obama administration says it has made enormous improvements in its website for enrolling consumers in new health insurance plans . There are still major hurdles to surmount , but the strides made raise the prospects that the website will be able to help millions of Americans buy policies from private insurers on new insurance exchanges , either by Dec. 23 , the deadline for policies that will take effect on Jan. 1 , or by March 31 , the deadline for taking out coverage without being fined . There will be federal subsidies to help those on modest incomes pay the premiums .
The website , HealthCare.gov , was supposed to be ready on Oct. 1 , but an array of technical problems made it impossible for all but a trickle of customers to compare policies and enroll in a plan . For some weeks in October , the site was down 60 percent of the time . That dire situation at the front end of the process has been largely corrected through a frantic repair effort over the past five weeks , but it won ’ t be enough unless the final back-end stage of enrollment is fixed as well .
On Sunday , the administration issued a progress report asserting that the system was running smoothly for a vast majority of users , that the site was now working more than 90 percent of the time , and that consumers were getting much better feedback from the site than before . Thanks to software and hardware improvements , the average page is loading in less than a second compared with an average of 8 seconds in late October , and the number of frustrating error messages that block people from using the site has fallen below 1 percent .
The administration estimated that the site could support 50,000 users at the same time , that users spend an average of 20 to 30 minutes on it , and that the site can support 800,000 visits a day . We won ’ t know how accurate those projections are until that many users try to use it . The website serves 36 states , but many other states have set up their own exchanges , several of which are working better than the federal exchanges . Some are in worse shape .