Republican lawmakers spent the last seven years vowing to repeal and replace Obamacare , and while the House took a first step toward that end Thursday in the narrow passage of the American Health Care Act , syndicated columnist ███ made an ominous prediction about where health care in this country is heading .
“ Historically speaking we are at the midpoint and we had seven years of Obamacare , changing expectations . I would predict that in less than seven years , we will be in a single-payer system , ” he told Fox News host Chris Wallace .
This , he said , is the “ great irony ” —that despite the electoral losses Democrats faced because of the Affordable Care Act and even though the law has largely failed in practice , Obamacare will still win in the end .
“ Obamacare failed at every level politically . … As you say , they lost seats in the House , Senate , governorships . Largely because of Obamacare . It failed on the ground , as was pointed out earlier . The insurers are in a dead spiral . The Obamacare exchanges are collapsing . You 've had these exchanges … completely disintegrating . But the irony is in the end , I think Obamacare wins the day because it changed expectations , ” he said . “ Look at the terms of the debate . Republicans are not arguing the free market anymore . They have sort of accepted the fact that the electorate sees healthcare as not just any commodity . It 's not like purchasing a steak or a car . It is something people now have a sense that government ought to guarantee . ''
Wallace pushed back , asking how we are going to get to single-payer and wondering if he was saying the Senate would not pass the repeal and replace plan ?
Krauthammer said in the short term , the Senate will not accept the House plan but will come up with one of its own . While he acknowledged he didn ’ t know how that would end up , he was certain “ it ’ s going to be a rickety arrangement. ” This in turn will negatively affect Republicans at the polls .
“ It ’ s likely that Republicans are going to suffer at the polls . And as a result of that , if that happens , you 're going to get a sea change in opinion and then there ’ s only two ways to go : to a radically individualist system where the market rules or single-payer . And the country is not going to go back to radical individualist , ” he said .