When Hillary Clinton held a seemingly insurmountable lead in most national and state polls , she didn ’ t need to worry about the health insurance sticker shock that much of the electorate is about to experience . Her edge was large enough to ensure victory even if she lost a couple of points due to voter anger over skyrocketing premiums caused by Obamacare . Those halcyon days are gone . Her national lead has all but evaporated , and she is behind Donald Trump or clinging to tenuous leads in crucial swing states whose voters will learn of huge rate hikes one week before Election Day .
To secure a majority in the Electoral College , Clinton must prevent Trump from winning several swing states that Obama carried in 2012 . If Trump hangs on to all the states Romney won and beats Hillary in a few of these battleground states , he will be the next President . And Obamacare may well help him accomplish this feat . Trump has pledged to repeal the unpopular “ reform ” law while Clinton still defends it . This distinction will become particularly poignant to swing state voters whose double-digit premium hikes hit just as they are deciding for whom to cast their November ballots .
In Ohio , for example , Obama easily won in 2012 but Trump has led Clinton in 4 of the last 5 surveys of likely voters listed by RealClearPolitics . It ’ s probably not a coincidence that Ohio is one of the battleground states in which Obamacare has driven up out-of-pocket health care expenses . The Columbus Dispatch reports , “ Ohioans insured through the Affordable Care Act will have fewer providers to choose from next year and will pay more for coverage. ” Buckeye State voters aren ’ t likely to switch to Clinton while she continues defend the law that is causing this catastrophe .
The same dynamic is at work in Florida , another crucial swing state that Obama narrowly won in 2012 . This year , as Election Day draws nigh , Floridians will discover what “ affordable ” means when Clinton uses the term . As the Miami Herald puts it , “ Floridians who buy their own health insurance in 2017 are likely to see their premiums rise by an average of 19 percent over the current year. ” As in Ohio , Trump has already erased Clinton ’ s Florida lead , and these Obamacare-induced rate hikes aren ’ t likely to send Sunshine State voters running back into her arms in November .
In addition to pulling ahead of Clinton in Ohio and Florida , Trump appears likely to pick off yet another state easily won by President Obama in 2008 and 2012 . He beat both John McCain and Mitt Romney by comfortable margins in Iowa , but Hillary is having difficulties there . At present , Trump leads her by 4.3 percent in the RealClearPolitics average , and it ’ s probable that Obamacare-induced premium increases in that state are a contributing factor . The Des Moines Register reports that individual premiums in Iowa will increase “ 19 percent to 43 percent , depending on the carrier . ”
Another swing state Obama easily won in 2012 , where Trump has overtaken Clinton in the polls is Nevada . And what is the premium picture in the Silver State ? The Las Vegas Review-Journal reports , “ Average overall premiums for 2017 in Nevada are expected to increase between 7.95 and 16.99 percent. ” By now , it won ’ t be hard to guess what the polls are showing . The most recent surveys of likely voters show Trump ahead of Clinton . The RealClearPolitics average still shows her with a lead of less than half a percent , and that will likely be long gone by Election Day .
Yet another state that Obamacare may help Trump win is Colorado . The Centennial state , according to Money , is one of several whose premiums will increase by about 25 percent . And the latest poll of likely voters shows Trump beating Clinton by 4 percent . And , if you think of Colorado as a blue state , remember that its electoral votes went to the GOP candidate in 7 of the last 10 presidential elections , including the last time a Clinton was on the ticket . It ’ s unlikely that Colorado ’ s voters will be anxious to vote for another Clinton who supports the law that caused its huge premium hike .
So , where does all this put Trump when you add up the Electoral College votes ? If he wins all of the states Romney won , that gets him to 206 . By adding Ohio ( 18 ) , Florida ( 29 ) , Iowa ( 6 ) , Nevada ( 6 ) , and Colorado ( 9 ) , that puts him at 274—and he wins . Moreover , this is not Trump ’ s only route to the White House . He can give up Iowa , Nevada , and Colorado if he wins Pennsylvania , a state that will be hit hard by Obamacare-induced premium increases and where his campaign is spending a lot of resources . Pennsylvania will get Trump to 273 electoral votes if he wins the Romney states .
It is not a given , of course , that Trump will carry all of the Romney states , which brings us to North Carolina . Romney won that state in 2012 and Clinton holds a less than 1 percent lead there . But how is Obamacare working out in the Tar Heel State ? Its exchange offers consumers one choice , Blue Cross & Blue Shield ( BCBS ) , since Aetna pulled out . It isn ’ t difficult to predict the effect this monopoly will have on rates . As local news station WLOS reports , “ BCBS is telling its agents exchange rates are going up… nearly 20 percent in 2017 after increasing 32 percent this year . ”
This doesn ’ t guarantee that Carolina will go to Trump , or that he will hold all of the Romney states , but it will hardly endear Clinton to the voters . Last week Gallup released a new survey showing that that the number of people who have been hurt by Obamacare has reached an all time high . This law is a debilitating disease that continues to afflict her presidential bid . By itself , it probably wouldn ’ t be enough to kill her campaign , but combined with the other scandals that continue to undermine its immune system , Obamacare might be the infection that finally proves fatal to Clinton ’ s presidential ambitions .