Over the weekend , President Trump fired a warning shot : “ If a new HealthCare Bill is not approved quickly , BAILOUTS for Insurance Companies and BAILOUTS for Members of Congress will end very soon ! ” Within moments of the tweet , Obamacare supporters discovered a new clause of the Constitution with which to thwart the president ’ s agenda : Goodbye Foreign Emoluments Clause , hello Take Care Clause . Under our Constitution , the president has a duty to “ take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed . ”
Were Mr. Trump threatening to stop making payments that are required by Obamacare , I would hop on the bandwagon . The “ BAILOUTS , ” however , are not part of the law the president has a duty to enforce . To faithfully execute the law , in fact , President Trump must stop these payments .
First , the White House should put an end to Congress ’ s special treatment under the Affordable Care Act . In 2009 , Senator Chuck Grassley ( R. , Iowa ) suggested an amendment to the health-care bill that would have prevented members of Congress and their staffs from receiving the same insurance other federal employees were eligible for ; instead , they would purchase coverage on the exchange . As drafted , the provision eliminated the generous subsidies — in the form of employer contributions — that members and their staff previously received . Under the law , workers on Capitol Hill would now be put in the same position as other Americans who had to pay the full cost of their insurance .
As you can imagine , this provision proved to be very unpopular , but to this day Congress has not changed the law . Yet where Congress would not act , President Obama did so unilaterally . The Office of Personnel Management ( OPM ) announced that if members of Congress and their staff purchased insurance on the District of Columbia ’ s small-business exchange , they would receive the same employer subsidies that had been available to them before the Affordable Care Act . Mr. Trump is exactly right that this is a “ BAILOUT. ” But more important , the payments are a blatantly illegal effort to bypass Grassley ’ s unpopular amendment .
In 2014 , a federal judge concluded that with the so-called OPM fix , the “ executive branch has rewritten a key provision of the ACA so as to render it essentially meaningless in order to save members of Congress and their staffs. ” Allowing the administration to rewrite the law , he wrote , “ would be a violation of Article I of the Constitution , which reposes the lawmaking power in the legislative branch. ” However , because the plaintiffs in the lawsuit ( Senator Ron Johnson and one of his staffers ) were not personally injured by OPM ’ s policy — indeed they benefited — the case was dismissed for lack of standing . While the Obama administration was content to make these illegal payments , the Trump administration should halt them .
Congress is not the only beneficiary of such illegal largess . The ACA employed two strategies to make health insurance more affordable . Section 1401 of the law provides for the payment of subsidies to consumers to reduce premiums . Section 1402 provides payments to insurers to offset certain “ cost sharing ” fees , such as deductibles and co-pays .
But while the ACA funds the subsidies under Section 1401 with a permanent appropriation , to date , Congress has not provided an annual appropriation for the cost-sharing subsidies under Section 1402 . Once again , where Congress would not act , President Obama did so unilaterally . The executive branch pretended that the ACA had actually funded Section 1402 all along , and it paid billions of dollars to insurers . Once again , Mr. Trump is exactly right that this is a “ BAILOUT. ” And , once again , the payments are a violation of the separation of powers .
If Congress wants the government to subsidize its own insurance , it should pass a bill .
Last year , a federal court ruled that Congress did not “ squeeze the elephant of Section 1402 reimbursements into the mousehole of Section 1401. ” Mr. Obama ’ s policy “ violates the Constitution , ” the court concluded . ” Congress is the only source for such an appropriation , and no public money can be spent without one . ”
This case , brought by the House of Representatives , now hovers in a state of limbo . The Trump Justice Department has not yet signaled whether it would continue the appeal begun by its predecessor . If the government is serious about repudiating pen-and-phone governance , it should announce that the payments are illegal and drop the appeal . This decision will no doubt trigger litigation by ACA supporters , but the far more obvious choice rests with the elected branch .
If Congress wants the government to subsidize its own insurance , it should pass a bill . If Congress wants the government to subsidize unprofitable insurance , it should pass a bill . It can not punt to the president ’ s pen and phone .
Over the past eight years , the executive branch has failed to faithfully execute all manner of federal law . President Obama ’ s deferred-action policies halted the enforcement of immigration law against millions of aliens . Likewise , his Justice Department declined to prosecute marijuana crimes across the United States . Slowly but surely , the Trump administration has begun to reverse these transgressions against the Constitution .
Halting the illegal payments to insurers and Congress would go a long way to repair these breaches in our separation of powers . But here ’ s another negotiation tactic : Don ’ t rescind the payments immediately . Announce they will be repealed on January 1 , 2018 . A deadline may provide the nudge needed for Congress to reach consensus on health-care reform and prove that our checks and balances still work .