Is It Time To Make Medical And Family Leave Paid ?
It 's been more than 20 years since passage of the landmark Family and Medical Leave Act , which allows workers to take up to 12 weeks of unpaid time off for medical or family reasons without losing their jobs .
Some workers ' advocates and politicians say it 's time to plug a big hole in the law by requiring that workers get paid while they 're on leave . But the change faces stiff opposition from some small business and other groups that argue that it would be too expensive and an unnecessary government intrusion .
Saying the reality for many families is that both parents must work , President Obama has pushed for paid family leave , calling it an `` economic necessity '' in his State of the Union address . He proposed $ 2.2 billion in next year 's federal budget to help five states get paid leave programs up and running , and an additional $ 35 million for states to conduct planning and startup activities .
Meanwhile , Democrats have reintroduced the Family and Medical Insurance Leave Act that would create a national paid leave program to cover two-thirds of people 's wages for up to 60 days a year . With Republicans in control of Congress , however , there 's little chance it will pass .
Supporters say that many workers ca n't afford to take unpaid leave and others are n't eligible for leaves because they work for small employers . The law allows workers to take time off to care for a newborn or adopted child , or if they or family members have a serious health condition . But it does n't apply to companies with fewer than 50 workers , and workers have to have worked for at least a year and logged at least 1,250 hours in the previous year to qualify for the benefit .
Only 13 percent of workers had access to paid family leave in 2013 , according to the Department of Labor 's 2014 national compensation survey . Meanwhile , 59 percent of workers were eligible for unpaid leave under the FMLA in 2012 .
Four states have implemented paid family leave programs , and their experience may provide guidance for a national paid family leave law .
Three of them — California , New Jersey and Rhode Island — fund the programs entirely by withholding employee wages . The programs are administered by states ' unemployment insurance agencies in conjunction with temporary disability insurance programs , according to human resources consultant Mercer . ( Washington state has a paid leave program on the books , but it has never been implemented because legislators have n't approved funding . )
California 's program is well established after more than a decade . It allows workers up to six weeks of leave annually at 55 percent of their weekly pay , up to a cap of $ 1,104 weekly in 2015 .
When Allison Guevara 's children , now aged 5 and 2 , were born , she twice took paid time off from her half-time job as a field representative for the American Federation of Teachers-affiliated union that represents librarians and lecturers at the University of California .
Guevara , 36 , says that getting just 55 percent of her salary might have been problematic , but she was able to negotiate with her employer to use accrued vacation and sick time to make up the other 45 percent of her pay .
Altogether , she took off at least three months with pay for each baby . Her husband , who works for the city of Santa Cruz , was not so lucky . The law typically does n't apply to public sector employees .
`` The time off was very necessary , '' says Guevara . In addition to bonding with her kids , `` breastfeeding was very difficult with my first one , it took eight weeks to get that going . ''
Guevara stumbled upon the information about her paid leave options by accident . That 's not surprising . A survey conducted last fall for the California Center for Research on Women and Families found that just 36 percent of Californians knew about the state 's paid leave program , a decline from three years earlier when 43 percent said they knew about the law .
`` Those who know about it are those who disproportionately work for employers who already do it , '' says Vicki Shabo , a vice president at the National Partnership for Women and Families . `` That leaves out many lower-paid workers . ''
California employers are generally positive about the paid family leave law , according to a study prepared for the U.S. Department of Labor last year . Ninety percent of employers in a 2010 survey said the law had either a positive effect on productivity , profit and morale , or it had no effect .
California , New Jersey and Rhode Island have built their programs around existing short-term paid disability program infrastructures ; only five states have such disability programs in place , says Catherine Stamm , a senior consultant at Mercer .
`` It 's not as difficult or momentous for these employers , '' Stamm says .
Under the Democrats ' bill , workers and employers would split the cost of the program , which would be administered by the Social Security administration .
But that 's a problem for small business owners , says Jack Mozloom , national media director for the National Federation of Independent Business , a trade group . Many of their members have fewer than 10 employees , Mozloom says , and if someone 's out on leave , it 's likely that they have to hire a temporary worker or pay someone overtime to do the job .
Financing a paid leave program would `` represent a real expense that some of them can not absorb , '' he says . `` When it 's mandated , it puts them in a hole . ''